Managed Services Solution DescriptionOoredoo Group Unified Network OperationsService Description

Table of ContentsI.	Introduction	3II.	Similar Experience and References	5III.	High level scope of work	9IV.	High Level Solution overview	25A.	Customer Value Driven Operating Model	54B.	Joined-Up operating Model	87C.	Lean and Agile	112D.	Digital Transformation, Automation and  AI	116E.	Transition & Governance	154V.	Hypothesis	187VI.	Exclusion	196VII.	RACI Matrix	200VIII.	BCP	203

I. IntroductionEver since its inception, Ooredoo Group has been growing in technology and innovation to serve its subscribers, international roamers tourists as well as Enterprises and industries to boost their business with best-in-class telecommunication services.Ooredoo Group (OG) is evolving from a traditional service provider (CSP) to a digital operation AI based company. Ooredoo Group has a complex multi-vendor, multi-technology mobile network spanning from Radio, transport to Core.  OG has 2G, 3G, 4G, 5G Non-Standalone (NSA), IoT services to manage and actively looking into deploying 5G Standalone (SA) in multiple Opcos. An evolved mobile broadband (eMBB) network with a mix of FDD/TDD/Microwave/IP/Circuit Switched (CS)/Packet Switch (PS) components all to serve OG subscribers with variety of bundles answering their every growing demand and needs for quality of experience.Ooredoo Network has initiated a Unified Network Operations RFP for Ooredoo Network Managed Services to upgrade and transform its operation through a NetOps Transformation using Digital Managed Services, focusing on:a. Customer Value Drivenb. Joined-Up NetOps Platformc. Lean and Agiled. Digital, Automation and AIEricsson fully understands OG targets from this RFP and is committed to manage OG’s complex networks, bringing senior subject matter experts, combining artificial intelligence, automation, and machine learning platforms to troubleshoot, solve end-to-end network issues, optimize, and improve network performance like it has never been done during the last decade.Moreover, Ericsson will act as technology consultant to OG bringing thought leadership and global best practices, innovative solutions for OG’s network evolution into a customer centric company.This document summarizes Ericsson’s Managed Services solution for Ooredoo and is built upon the information provided by Ooredoo in the RFP and associated clarifications provided during the tendering process.Ericsson Managed Services (MS) is present in over 100 countries and employs over 27,000 professionals. We manage more than 800,000 RAN nodes, 1 billion subscribers in over 300 Managed Service contracts.Over the years close to 30,000 employees have been successfully transferred to Ericsson as part of outsourcing projects.We have unparalleled multi-vendor experience, and technical expertise on almost all vendor equipment like Nokia, Huawei, Cisco, ZTE, IBM, Fujitsu, Redback, Juniper, HP, Microsoft, Oracle, etc.Ericsson Network Performance and Optimization services (NPO) is a key ingredient in ensuring your networks handling the high level of data traffic brought on by this user behavior while maintaining service quality and user experience. Ericsson Optimization team shall be at the center of network operations and will coordinate and collaborate with multiple departments at MSP and OG to ensure the success of the managed services delivery.We have global capabilities to deliver value-added services in Optimization with our highly skilled professionals and a complete portfolio of services and platforms. These full range of services address everything from network transformation, and network optimization to assure an optimal end user experience and OG profitability. We use our unique platforms to analyze your network issues more accurately and rapidly than any other solution provider giving OG the ability to focus on business and subscriber’s satisfaction.Ericsson Managed Services has invested over one billion USD in people, processes, methods, and a best-in-industry tool suite. Our tool suite has over 25.000 users. We have already developed and implemented over 3,000 automation rules and dozens of AI use cases globally in the telecom networks operated by us.
II. Similar Experience and ReferencesEricsson is the undisputed number one in Managed Services• Ericsson has led the Managed Services industry from the start about 2 decades ago. Now we take the next step with our Integrated Operations Centre build on customer centricity, preventive operations and data driven artificial intelligence and automation. • Ericsson provides support for networks with more than 2 billion subscribers and is managing networks for more than 1 billion subscribers worldwide.• Ericsson has experience from more than 300 Managed Services contracts, delivering Managed Services to customers in over 180 countries.• Unparalleled multi-vendor experience: over 50 percent of the managed equipment is non-Ericsson.• We manage about 6 billion alarms coming in from all networks, raise 51 million trouble tickets, and send out 18 million work orders to field annually.• Our automation platforms send about 1 million commands to the networks every day and process 70% of the alarms we monitor. Today, less than 5% of the alarms in the network result in manually raised trouble ticket.Figure 1- Industry Leading MS ProviderChange agent expertise & transition experience• Sophisticated processes for handling staff transfer and reorganization of operations.• More than 25,000 people successfully transferred to Ericsson.• More than 150 transformation and projects conducted globally.• Often these change processes are handled in parallel and in close alignment with large technology projects like new technology deployment projects or large vendor swap processes. Unrivalled Local synergies• Ericsson’s Managed Services contract with the largest operators across the Middle East and African Continent are multi country, multi technology and vendor agnostic. • Ericsson has a strong presence which includes Managed Service operational delivery capabilities for in the in-country operations and for regional support towards other MS operations.A few customer references and the scope delivered by Ericsson for them is illustrated below –Figure 2 – Customer ReferencesBelow are the references with whom we went public in our optimization services and Cognitive Software AI capabilities (i.e., officially announced and we have permission from the operator to publicly its name/brand):Ericsson ranks best mobile experience with Far EasTone, Swisscom, TDC NETEricsson selected for AI-based RAN optimization by NTT DOCOMOIntroducing AI-powered Ericsson Performance Optimizers - EricssonBreaking performance records for a digital Denmark - EricssonVodafone and Ericsson facilitate data-driven decisions with AI-based solutions in OmanQatar stadiums get 5G from Ericsson and OoredooMobily partners with Ericsson to enhance subscriber upload speedsMobily expands Ericsson managed services partnership in Saudi ArabiaXL Axiata accelerates deployment through Virtual Drive Test - EricssonEricsson extends managed services deal with Zain Iraq to 2021 - YouTubeJoint China Unicom and Ericsson AI lab to drive innovation in network services - EricssonEricsson to deliver Network Optimization service in Indonesia with XL Axiata Swisscom: AI for performance leadership & operational excellence (ericsson.com)Indosat Ooredoo continues partnership with Ericsson to leverage AI/MLJazz extends nationwide network optimization with Ericsson• Nokia IP Experience Reference, DTAC Thailand• Nokia IP Experience Reference, Indosat Indonesia• Zain Iraq, Managed Service Optimization, Ericsson PS Core, Nokia CS Core and IMS, Ericsson and Huawei RAN, Transport Network Huawei/NEC/Aviat for Microwave and Huawei/Juniper/Cisco for IP transport network. 5 years renewed to additional 5 years. Nokia IMS is based on Nokia CBIS which is the Nokia version of Openstack VIM.Below are the references with whom we have an ongoing (and renewed) contract for managed services optimization and multivendor exposure (i.e., officially not announced and we have no permission from the operator to publicly use its name/brand):In Gulf Countries and neighboring middle east countries, Ericsson is managing the following Operators with a mix of multivendor in Core, Transport and RAN:• Pakistan: Operator A, full managed services optimization RAN Huawei and RAN ZTE• Oman: Operator B, full managed services optimization, Ericsson RAN, Ericsson Transport, Ericsson Core (including 5G RAN and CORE). 5 years contract.• Bahrain: Operator C, managed services optimization RAN (including 5G), transport and CORE. 3 years renewed for 3 years, renewed again for 3 years.• Qatar: Operator D, Ericsson RAN and Nokia CORE. Huawei IMS has been deployed prior to the mega event in the country for 2022.• Multivendor Operator E, 60% Huawei, 10% Nokia, 30% ZTE, managed services optimization for 4 years. Ranked no.1 in country by Ookla and Telecom regulatory body.• Multivendor Operator F, 45% Ericsson, 30% Huawei, 25% Nokia, managed services optimization continuously renewed since 2014.• India: Multivendor Operator G, Nokia and Ericsson RAN 2G/3G/4G/5G. Not yet publicly announced, Including the below blocks for 5G NSA:• Indonesia: Multivendor Operator H, Huawei/Nokia/Ericsson RAN 2G/3G/4G/5G. Not yet publicly announced.
III. High level scope of work Ericsson will provide Managed Services for a period of five year. The services scope is summarized below.Managed ServicesMS Team AvailabilityL1 Support (Event Management & Monitoring), Incident Management24x7L2 Support, Problem and Change Management8x5 with on-call supportReporting8x5 (business hours) 3PP FLM Management8x5 (business hours)Power Operations (AC & DC)8x5 (business hours)Data Center operations 24X7Network Performance & Optimization8x5 (business hours)Table 1: Managed Services Team AvailabilityThe scope of Managed Services Operation for the network elements is represented in the following diagram.  The network domains and service functions covered are based on the objects of services provided in the RFP.Figure 3 (a) – Managed Services Scope – Network ElementsB2B & B2C MSP Scope SummaryThe B2B & B2C scope considered for each OpCo is as per the general scope of work defined in Schedule 1 of the RFP – Figure 3 (b) – Managed Services Scope – B2B/ B2C  Figure 3 (c) – Managed Services Scope – B2B/ B2CB2B/ B2C activities considered are linked to only the managed objects/ BoQ of each OpCo and scope boundaries as represented in the diagram above and summarized below -  ScopeQatarKuwaitOmanService Desk B2BYYYService Desk B2CYYYB2B CPE monitoringNNNONT monitoringNNNOLT monitoring and troubleshootingYYYB2B Order Management Support for NW nodes*YYYB2B CPE ConfigurationNNNB2C CPE configurationNNNL1 Support B2BYYYL1 Support B2CYYY*Order Management is fully automated in all OpCos. MSP to support only for cases which require manual interventionTable 2: B2B & B2C ScopeB2B/ B2C activities not considered in the standard delivery scope (CPE Monitoring & CPE Configuration) can also be delivered if required. These have been quoted as Optional Services in the commercial offer. (1) Objects of Service The NW BoQ considered for each Opco is as follows –CountryNode Type2022202320242025202620272028RemarksVendorOmanRAN Physical Sites2694274828152897295830253093Customer givenHuaweiOmanControllers (BSC, RNC)101055555HuaweiOmanMW19732043211321832314245326006%*Ericsson, SIAEOmanCore (CS, PS,IMS other)1017981828487903%*CS - Ericsson, PS IMS - HuaweiOmanIPMPLS (150)11301241136615031593168917906%*Huawei, Juniper (IGW)OmanDWDM1111251271301351411464%*HuaweiOmanOSS (no info shared)55555550%*OmanVAS28Telenity, OnMobile, Invigo, Globitel, IntraRat, A1 SystemQatarPhysical Sites3572354837183888396140734185Customer givenEricsson Nokia HuaweiQatarControllers (BSC, RNC)16181818181818Ericsson NokiaQatarMW6976977397838308809336%*Ericsson NokiaQatarCore (CS, PS, IMS, other)1051051081111151181223%*Nokia Huawei CiscoQatarIPMPLS16831683178418912004212522526%*Nokia Huawei Cisco Ericsson JuniperQatarDWDM and TX11191119115311871223125912973%*Nokia HuaweiQatarISP Apps553553553553553553553Huawei Evertz Verimatrix ATEMEQatarIPTV16161616161616HP/Oracle/Cisco/HuaweiQatarVAS18181818181818Telenity Invego/ uaweiKuwaitPhysical Sites2731283629663121323933693499Customer givenHuawei, NokiaKuwaitControllers (BSC, RNC)6333333Huawei, NokiaKuwaitMW14921625182619262042216422946%*Ericsson, SIAEKuwaitCore (CS, PS, IMS)444650505253553%*Ericsson, Huawei, Oracle(STP), Bluecat(DNS)KuwaitIPMPLS17851988210822282362250326546%*Cisco, HuaweiKuwaitDWDM77777770%*HuaweiKuwaitFiber Sites17741874199421142262242025907%*KuwaitVAS16Enghouse, Tayana, Opencode, Invigo, Comviva*  - %Growth assumption 2026 onwards as this data not shared in RFPTable 3(a): Network BoQBoQ for NFVi (2 Opcos) CountryYearMonthVendorTelco Cloud License (pCPU)Compute ServersStorage ArraysStorage Capacity (TB)TOR SwitchesSPINE SwitchesDC GWsSDN Controller LicensesOman2022DecemberERICSSON00000000Oman2022DecemberHUAWEI39219628991.2704478Oman2023December542271661732.89644104Oman2024December668334762083.211644124Oman2025December728364902582.414046150Kuwait2022DecemberERICSSON00000000Kuwait2022DecemberHUAWEI2281140410TBs644456Kuwait2023DecemberHUAWEI2281140410TBs644456Kuwait2024DecemberHUAWEI2641320562TBs744466Kuwait2025DecemberHUAWEI3121560670TBs844476Table 3(b): NFVi BoQBoQ for IN Charging (3 Opcos):OG Charging BOQPrimaryGR \ TestOman, Kuwait & Qatar - 3 SitesThree SitesSDP, CCN, AIR/AF, CS-NMT, OCC, NG-VSECMS, NGVS, NGCRS, HP VXML-IVR, NELS, ECNMTMAINGR/TESTOman1516Kuwait1317Qatar4717Total7550Table 3(c): IN BoQBoQ for ACTIVE EIO (PCEM) (3 Opcos): OPCOTotal Cells (4G & 5G)20242025202620272028Qatar54,20658,77763,29265,94468,595Kuwait43,97148,39152,81153,02954,573Oman41,04143,79546,13647,18148,241TOTAL141,241152,988164,265168,180173,438Table 4(a): ACTIVE EIO BoQBoQ for PASSIVE EIO (NGEM) (3 Opcos): OPCOPower CategoryGridGrid + DGTotal SitesRemarks Qatar33537372Assumed both AC & DC systems are monitored via RSMKuwait77286858Assumed only DC systems is monitored via RSMOman31535350Assumed both AC & DC systems are monitored via RSMTOTAL1,4221581,580 Table 4(b): PASSIVE EIO BoQNetwork Ticket Volume (3 Opcos)DomainKuwaitOmanQatarCS-Core1101252518IP-TX17157581522MW249882290PS-Core587124RAN1352266874781Roaming3631714VAS21242IN4288OSS95436Corporate IT54IP TV773Optimization  883Table 5: Network Ticket Volume per OpCo(2) Service Components for Network Performance & Optimization (NPO) In the following paragraphs, Ericsson will detail its commitment to managing OG opcos for the listed high-level scopes as per Ericsson statement of compliance for Network MS_Schedule 5_Network Performance and Optimization (NPO):• Coverage and Quality Optimization• Capacity and Infrastructure asset usage Optimization• Network Optimization: soft (features, parameters) and physical (antenna system) and End-to-End optimization (cross domains: RAN, Tx, IP, Core)• Transport Microwave (links) and Transport IP (interfaces) optimization• CORE CS and CORE PS optimization• Performance Management• Customer Complaints Handling for Radio related issues• Drive Test, Walk test, Interference hunting, Benchmarking(a) Transport Optimization Scope of WorkMicrowave Transport OverviewThe Microwave Transmission Network Optimization service is where recommendations based on a root cause analysis of performance issues are proposed, detailed design for the recommendations is prepared and are handed over to customer for implementing the changes. After the implementation of the proposed changes, the improved network performance is verified and presented.It is useful for improving the performance of the current Microwave network and provides useful information which would aid in any future expansion of the microwave network and ensures that the infrastructure capabilities are used efficiently, and revenue is maximized.Startup & Information GatheringThe Start-up and Information Gathering activities in the Microwave Network Optimization service are essentially the interaction between the customer and Ericsson.  This is to ensure a common understanding of the requirements and assumptions to be used in the solution and detailed optimization.  Information is gathered taking and consolidating aspects highlighted by different parties to have a better understanding on potential issues and improvement areas, covering interactions with planning, implementation and monitoring departments.Required Samples of Information are:• Transport Network Topology Information:o Existing sites, Microwave connectivity and configurationo Aggregation network interconnectivity and design• Transport Network Traffic Model Information:o Existing traffic routing/loading, protection schemes, traffic granularity.o Future traffic growth predictions, traffic routing and grooming requirements, protection requirements• Transport Network Equipment Information:o Existing network equipmento Network equipment requirements including required features, expandability, etc.Microwave Network Optimization Service Delivery ActivitiesThe information gathered in the initial audit phase are measured by ITU KPIs and the current design and performance of the Transport network and problems or risks are highlighted. The performance and configuration analysis results are described in a Detailed Performance Report, giving reasons for poor performance and recommendations on resolving the performance issues to improve the overall network performance. These recommendations will also highlight any modifications required on the Topology Diagram or the Design document. Recommendations may include configuration changes, application of features, redesign of a cluster, re-planning of links, hardware swap-outs, etc.Supporting E2E QoS alignment with other domains like RAN and Core, ex: VoLTE calls voice quality, throughput problems, latency.Three main groups can be defined:Integrity• Errors, loss/discard• Delay, delay variation• Radio link input and output powerAccessibility• Availability (up-time)• Bandwidth availabilityRetainability• Utilization, discard• Packet size and typeMicrowave Transport Network Audit The Microwave Audit service is targeted to help OG make the most of their Microwave network infrastructure and to maximize revenue opportunities. The audit service provides also important information and recommendations useful for improving the performance of the current Microwave network. The information gathered in the audit is analyzed along with the current design of the network and once problematic links are identified, recommendations are made to improve the performance in a detailed performance report. Quality of Service is fundamentally a facility for the provider to specify a set the quality parameters of a particular traffic or service in the network and have the network provisioned such that the features, configuration and signaling are all correctly in place to ensure the network responds with the expected, differentiated treatment of traffic. The audit identifies any deficiencies or limitations in the OG’s network that might result in sub-optimal QoS performance, also it checks the transport design to avoid single point of failurePerformance auditAs indicated above, the current performance of the Microwave links will be exported from the management system and terminals with low performing values compared to the ITU Standard are highlighted. Possible root causes are investigated, and possible rectification proposals are provided. Configuration auditThe current configuration of the Microwave links will be exported from the management system and will be compared to the Design Parameters. The result will include a list of links which do not follow the Design Parameters in terms of Configuration:• Transmitter Power• Received Signal Level• Frequency Channel Assignment• Capacity & Modulation Scheme• QoS Parameters• Other Applicable ParametersCapacity auditsThe utilization of the Microwave links will be exported from the management system and will be analyzed. The result will include a list of links which show a high bandwidth utilization and accordingly pose a bottleneck in the network. Microwave Network Optimization Service DeliverablesThis stage of the Network Optimization summarizes all the findings, recommendations, and conclusions.  The following documents are prepared:• Monthly reports including findings and recommendations.• Short-term recommendations• Long-term recommendations• Results PresentationMicrowave Network Tools and PlatformsEricsson will use the available NMSs in OG and their Dashboards like Ericsson ENIQ, Huawei and SIAE Microwave NMSs.(b) IP Transport Network OptimizationIP Transport OverviewThe IP Network Optimization function encompasses network performance trending and analytics activities on the contracted and accepted IP systems to ensure the performance is maintained at industry standard levels. This document summarizes the delivery components of the IP Network Optimization Service and outlines its service functions and activities Ericsson will provide to the Customer during the IP optimization service.Ericsson can mitigate the effects of higher bandwidth and tighter latency requirements by offering an IP Network optimization service to ensure that user demands are met and to identify when it is necessary to adapt the network for any new requirements.			Maintaining a loop-free network with minimal latency is a basic requirement for delivering any end user application.  Ericsson’s IP Network Optimization service covers these subjects ensuring key design principles are followed to avoid and minimize unwanted delays and/or loops in the topology.The IP Network Optimization Service Delivery Process is divided into several areas which are processed in order:• Startup & Information Gathering• Network Audit• Optimization & RecommendationsStartup & Information GatheringThe IP Network Optimization Start-up Process and Information Gathering Phase refers to establishing the project and its high-level planning. The objective of the Start-up phase is to prepare the IP Network Optimization project with sufficient information in order for the project to start as quickly and smoothly as possible.Project related issues such as administration, initial scope definition, delivery timeframe, project practicality, skills, competence, and responsibilities make up the contents of this phase in order to get the project started. The main purpose of this activity is to accurately collect the requirements and existing network state to provide a solid basis for the later activities. Required Sample of Information which must be collected are:• IP Network Topology Information:• Existing sites and its equipment types, customer connectivity and transmission medium• Aggregation network interconnectivity and design• IP Network Traffic Model Information:• Existing traffic routing/loading, protection schemes, traffic granularity• Future traffic growth predictions, traffic routing and grooming requirements, protection requirements• QoS and VLAN considerations• IP Network Equipment Information:• Existing network equipment• Network equipment requirements including required features, expandability, etc.• Additional Service Information:• Interworking • Peer-to-Peer networksIP Network AuditThe aim of the IP Audit is to make a thorough analysis of the Routers and Switches configuration, performance, and behavior. Inspection is done for finding the most probable root cause for problematic issues. A list of recommended actions will be provided to improve certain low performing IP KPIs that have been identified by the IP Audit service. IP Performance AuditEricsson will monitor and generate Performance reports for the IP components under the scope. The Performance will be managed based on KPIs mutually agreed between Ericsson and the Customer. The audit will be performed via passive measurements. IP Configuration AuditThe goal of this part is to review configuration areas related to performance and throughput against best practices and Ericsson’s recommendations. The list includes:• IP/MPLS Routing Protocols convergence time related settings• Resilience mechanisms fail-over time related settings• Interfaces’ physical and link layer settings• Load balancing settings • Impact of packet filters configuration on packet flowsIP Capacity AuditIt involves provisioning of services at the right time and in the right volume as planned and ensuring that it is provided in the most efficient manner. Ericsson is expected to manage the available IP Network capacity on the network which are in the contracted BOQ. Ericsson will provide updates on the available capacity on those components. Ericsson will identify potential capacity constraints and initiate expansion where all expansion costs will be borne by the Customer. Ericsson is not responsible for services degradation resulting from delayed capacity expansion activities. IP Network Optimization Service Delivery Activities:	The Services Optimization Services Solution is based on the following activities:• Supporting E2E QoS alignment with other domains like RAN and Core depending on the QoE, ex: VoLTE calls voice quality, throughput problems, latency.• Capacity management as per network utilization based on reports provided	• Link Capacity analysis (BW) and recommendation for reports provided• KPI analysis, performance analysis and optimization activities in network for reports provided			• Node Capacity analysis (CPU/MEM/Hard disc/session) and recommendations	• Analysis of the customer requirements & Capacity modification recommendations	• Performance improvement recommendations based on performance reports • Network Parameter analysis				• Follow-Up / tracking with other departments for performance related activities	• Configuration Auditing and optimization of network elements	• Capacity Plan as per network utilization			• Data throughput analysis based on reports provided• Checking the transport design to avoid single point of failure		In the IP Network Optimization Service Process three main groups can be defined:• Integrity       Errors, loss/discard       Delay, delay variation• Accessibility       Availability (up-time)       Bandwidth availability• Retainability       Utilization, discard       Packet size and typeAll the recommendations will highlight the modifications to be done in the Design documents.IP Network Optimization Service DeliverablesThe Service Deliverables are as follows:• Quarterly report including analysis and recommendations of all the IP transport network optimization activities that occurred during the quarter• Impact reports for implemented critical or major activities• Short-term recommendations for the potential improvements in the future• Long term recommendations for the potential improvements in the futureIP Network Tools and PlatformsEricsson will use the available NMSs in OG and their Dashboards like Cisco, Huawei and Juniper NMSs. During the Transition phase, Ericsson will identify if automation is needed to post process data out of the platforms and shall implement the automation during contract duration if it brings efficiency in Ericsson’s optimization activities.(c) Core Network OptimizationCore OverviewThis document describes the Core Network Optimization Service Scope.Ericsson Core Network Optimization Service will support OG’s in optimizing the core network to ensure the best usage of existing core Network elements.Core Network Optimization Service shall be offered to Core network elements across different network domains (IMS, CS, EPC and 5GC) among OG network listed in the below reference.Startup & Information GatheringThe Service Start-up Process and Information Gathering Phase refers to establishing the project. The objective of the Start-up phase is to prepare the service delivery team with sufficient information for the project to start as quickly and smoothly as possible.Project related issues such as administration, initial scope definition, delivery timeframe, project practicality, skills, competence, and responsibilities make up the contents of this phase in order to get the project started. The main purpose of this activity is to accurately collect the requirements and existing network state to provide a solid basis for the later activities. Required Sample of Information required is:• Core Network Topology Information       Existing sites, its equipment types, and connectivity       The Initial Designs• Traffic Model Information       Existing traffic routing/loading, protection schemes, traffic granularity• Core Network Equipment Information       Existing network equipmentCore Network Optimization Service Delivery ActivitiesCore Network Optimization is configuring the network parameters the way it ensures best performance being applied. Performance assessment and Reporting includes analyzing and reporting a set of performance indicators showing elements and overall network performance. Performance assessment will provide reports and trend analysis and recommendations for the performance indicators. The Following activities are part of the Core Network Optimization services that Ericsson proposes to the OG:• Performance monitoring and supporting E2E QoS alignment with other domains like RAN and Transport depending on the QoE, ex: VoLTE calls voice quality, throughput problems, latency.• Parameters tuning and recommended actions that will highlight the modifications to be done in the Design.• Network topology study • Capacity audit and review• Configuration Audit• Proposing New features• Escalation Point to Performance degradation out of the SW/HW related problem (external factors)• Expansion plans for signaling linksCore Network Optimization Service DeliverablesThe Service Deliverables are as follows:• Weekly report including analysis and recommendations• Impact reports for implemented critical or major activities• Special Events reports (Eid, New Year and Ramadan Declaration Day)• Performance analysis• Short-term recommendations for the potential improvements in the future• Long term recommendations for the potential improvements in the futureCore Network Tools and PlatformsEricsson will use the available NMSs in OG and their Dashboards like Huawei and Nokia Microwave NMSs and the Core Probes. During the Transition Phase, Ericsson will identify if automation is needed to post process data out of the platforms and shall implement the automation during contract duration if it brings efficiency in Ericsson’s optimization activities.(d) RAN Optimization Scope of WorkEricsson’s network experts have delivered multiple RAN multi-vendor optimization services around the world and have extensive experience in assisting operators to maintain and optimize a high-end network. During the initial phase of the optimization services establishment; a comprehensive network performance analysis and audit of the network is performed. The thorough audit focuses on information gathering regarding the current network configuration and performance the results of the audit will drive many of the performance improvement activities. A detailed plan shall be handshake and agreed between Ericsson an OG depicting the next steps for network performance improvement and user experience enhancement.Network Performance OptimizationThe NPO service is conducted by experienced Ericsson engineers who can be assisted by one or more drive test teams.  The key activities of the NPO service are:• Problematic sites/cells identification via statistics, alarms, traces, drive test logs• Area drive test of high profile and/or poorly performing zones• Activating of RAN SW features and tuning of soft logical parameters• Activating of RAN SW features for energy efficiency• Network coverage and quality optimization assessment based on signal level, quality, noise ratio and interference.• Mobility strategy optimization: Intra system and Inter system (IRAT) Handovers and neighboring definitions for idle and connected modes (trigger values, Event thresholds, hysteresis, offsets tuning)• eNb and gNb power level optimization• Recommendation of physical antenna system changes (location on roof, mechanical tilts, electrical tilts, azimuth)• Monitoring of network trends as traffic and subscriber base grows, propose traffic balancing techniques between technologies, carriers, sectors, sites and exhaust the best resource utilization before capacity expansion recommendations (Antennas, Basebands and Radios)• Perform frequency related campaigns such as (Refarming, frequency allocation, carrier aggregation)• Participate in new planned sites acceptance and provide recommendations for its impact on existing surrounding sites• The production of monthly/quarterly activity reports detailing performance from a network (statistical) and end user (drive test, crowdsource) perspectiveEnd-User Experience EnhancementThe focus of this part is to investigate and improve the end-user experience, whether it is related to throughput, latency, VoLTE/VoNR call, availability of service and integrity of service that could be directly felt by OG mobile subscribers and enterprise customers.This is performed by strong collaboration and coordination between the RAN optimization team with field, transport optimization, core optimization and customer quality teams, supported by right platforms and tools. Cycle of suggested activities as below:• User level performance problem handling• End-to-End performance optimization • VVIP / VIP locations and route guarantee• Use of traces, existing OG probes• Use of social media apps measurements and OG crowdsource data insights• Quality of Service (QoS) and Quality of Experience (QoE) based Optimization• End-to-End network Nodes Parameters and Timers Audit• Field campaigns (outdoor, indoor, communities, roads, new developments)• End Users complaint handling for VIP and regular customersField TestsField tests are a combination of outdoor drive tests and indoor walk tests with the objective to collect network coverage and quality statistics and end user experience. Drive/Walk tests can be used as investigation means for the optimization of Radio Network as well as detecting end-to-end issues from the field air interface up to core network gateways.Ericsson shall use well known and reputable drive/walk test kits for the traditional drive test measurement field collection to fulfill the requirements set by OG as listed below:• Top 5 Communities• Applications and websites drive test and walk test• Competitor benchmarking related drive test (OG vs competition)Ericsson will also adopt global test procedures to conduct the drive/walk testing following the agreement with OG. Analysis reports with details shall be provided and explained to OG team. Ericsson will partner with well-known suppliers to provide all the required activities for drive/walk testing and will use the latest drive test kits (UEs, log collection SW, post processing SW) to achieve the best results.However, and as part of process automation and increase efficiencies, Ericsson shall use geolocation in specific areas and for specific technologies. This will reduce the need for traditional drive test measurement collection in the field specially in distant and remote areas, will decrease the time to respond to customer complaints.
IV. High Level Solution OverviewThe RFP requires network operations transformation proposal for six countries – Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Algeria, Iraq & Tunisia. Ericsson is proposing managed services solution for three countries – Kuwait, Oman & Qatar and will address the required strategic pillars of the NetOps transformation by deploying Ericsson Operations Engine as a unified platform, people, processes & metrics solution for these three countries.  Ericsson understands the magnitude and span of Ooredoo delivery organization in these countries and is ready to coordinate and collaborate with various departments in Ooredoo to meet the operational demands and contribute to the success of the ongoing projects. In accordance with the RFP requirements, the Ericsson solution is designed in a way that there will be multiple instances where the Operations team (NOC/ SOC) will support the Planning & Optimizations team (NPO) with measurements/data/reports and the NPO team will perform analysis and provide optimization recommendations. Implementation of these recommendations will always be done in conjunction with NOC/ SOC team. Figure 4 - MS Solution overviewEricsson Operations Engine is an end-to-end Managed Services operating model that through automation, artificial intelligence, and the power of data, is transforming operations. The Engine is vendor and technology agnostic and built to evolve in step with technology and customer demands. It has built in data and network security to be compliant with global standards and regional legislature.This model is based on four main principles.- Consumer & enterprise experience becomes the primary focus for operations.- All activities and processes that can be automated will be automated.- AI, advance analytics, automation, and new processes underpin the operation to make the shift from reactive to predictive and preventive actions.- New skills combining data science, network engineering and operations.The Ericsson Operations Engine has three building blocks.Business Outcomes: the business benefits that Ooredoo can expect to be delivered by Ericsson viz, optimized delivery costs, improved Customer Experience, new revenue streams, efficient transformation along with trusted and secure business. Capabilities: the Ericsson Operations Engine potential and areas it targets. For Ooredoo Capabilities, Data Driven Operations, Automated execution and AI driven insights are key.Delivery Components: the elements like people, processes and tools that make it all happen across all Capabilities & Business Outcomes. Components build-up Capabilities which deliver the Business Outcomes by following service and software centric delivery approach.Figure 5 - Ericsson Operations EngineEricsson proposes a state of art Network Operations Centre (NOC) being data driven, preventive and service centric; leveraging advanced data analytics enabled by AI/ML.The NOC will be able to facilitate a service-led top-down approach, where network will be configured and changed based on user experience and service requirements. It will also collaborate with service design, network planning, engineering, and service operations to jointly design, deliver and manage new services.Figure 6 - EOE Functional Delivery ModelThe Operation Engine comes with a redesigned delivery model consisting of the following layers -- An Ericsson Managed Services Leadership Team (MSCLT) headed by a MS Chief Operation Officer (MSCOO) and supported by four Service Owners, a Program Manager, a Contract Manager, and support functions. Each Service Owners has the overall responsibility for the end-to-end performance and quality of a certain service (group): Voice, Data, OTT, and Enterprise- A Service Operations layer, corresponding to main Service Operations Center (SOC) functions, with a focus on services quality and customer experience- An Automated Operations taking care of the activities today performed in the front office but anticipating much higher automation levels- A Technical Authority taking care of many of the activities done today in the back-office but explicitly moving away from technology silo’s- A new Data Authority to manage and protect data; now a key function when following a data driven approach.(1) Global Ericsson NOC/SOC/B2B/B2C/3PP Management OrganizationEricsson proposes a hybrid delivery model with majority of resources based in Ericsson Global Services NOC in India and key resources from each domain to be based locally for each Opco. In addition to the local key NOC resources, the Ericsson Managed Services leadership team and 3PP management team will also be based locally for each Opco. Ericsson proposes to use its cloud based global tools solution for operations and analytics. The end-to-end delivery model with accountability of service functions is shown in the figure below.Figure 7 - Delivery ModelThe MS leadership team and 3PP management team will be 100% local and dedicated for each countryThe automated operations (Level 1) and Technical Authority (Level 2) delivery resources for NOC & SOC will primarily be based in the offshore location (GSC) with a few key resources locally in each country for any local emergency support as well as interfacing with Ooredoo local teamThe Operations Support team (IM/PM/CM/Reporting/Data Authority) will be 100% offshoreEricsson cloud tools framework (MSDP) will be deployed to manage the network. The O&M of Ericsson tools will be handled by the offshore Ericsson tools teamOnshore Organization StructureThe proposed onshore organization structure is shown below – 				Figure 8 – Onshore Delivery ModelEricsson will appoint a MSCOO who will be overall responsible for Managed Service outcomes & ownership of the delivery for Ooredoo GroupThe MSCOO and contract manager will be common for all countriesOperations in each country will be led by the Operations Assurance Head who will be responsible for the operations of that country and manage both the onsite and offshore teamsThe local organization will include technical experts per domain, business analyst for the SOC as well as the 3PP management team which will manage the Ooredoo FSP/ Power/ IMAC vendors  For Ooredoo B2B and B2C customers, depending on the requirement in each country -• 24x7 monitoring and level 1 fault management (L1FM) of relevant network nodes (BoQ to be provided) will be done by a local automated operations team • A Service desk responsible to receive, follow-up and close all technical network complaints received from FTTH customer through various channels of communication such as phone, fax, and emails will be established• A B2B helpdesk will also be setup to manage communication with Global Partners and Platinum Customers only for technical problem solvingEricsson proposes to use Ooredoo premises for its local team and no separate office/ NOC will be set in any of the countries by Ericsson. Offshore Organization StructureThe proposed offshore organization structure is shown below –				Figure 9 – Offshore Delivery ModelEricsson will appoint a Managed Service Delivery Manager (MSDM) for each country in the offshore Global Service Centre. The MSDM will be overall responsible for the remote delivery and report to the respective onshore Operations Assurance Head The NW delivery team will be synergized for all Op Cos –• The 24x7 automated operations team will be responsible for monitoring and L1FM of all domains (as per NW BoQ) and led by the automated operations manager• The Technical Authority team will handle 2nd level tickets and will be domain specific, led by a domain manager. This team will be available 8x5 and on-call for emergency and critical issuesThe SOC delivery manager will lead the SOC team which includes –• Service reliability (24x7 monitoring of services),  • Service Quality Management team (Service Management - Incident, Problem and Change Management, NPS Survey & Reporting and Customer Problem Management)• Service Improvement team (SKPI Trend Analysis, Continuous Service Improvement & UC Modelling, Customer Experience Analyst Expert, NPS Analyst Expert)• Business Analyst (Generating Business related Use cases; Evolve Predictive analytics; Support revenue & churn analysis; Data scientist for creating value proposition with CEM & NPS)The Operations Support team will include support functions like WLA, process, UC development and automation team, IM/PM/CMIn addition to this, to handle issues related to business-critical customers, Ericsson proposes to have a 24x7 Technical Authority (back-office) team for the Enterprise and FTTH customers which will support the local Enterprise and FTTH team in resolving customer trouble tickets.(2) Process FrameworkThe Ericsson Operations Engine comes with a comprehensive Process Framework. This framework is fully backward compatible with the ITIL and eTOM but comes with new and very strong data management and predictive & preventive features leveraging advanced analytics using artificial intelligence.The processes follow the create, sustain and evolve flow.Create is the lifecycle management (plan, design, build / deploy and terminate) of the Customer’s network & IT resources and/or Services (based on scope), securing adequate functionality, capacity, availability, and performance to meet the requirements and business needs.Sustain is the ongoing operations and optimization of the network and IT resources and / or Services (based on scope) to meet the Customer’s demands for availability and performance.Evolve is the continuous improvement of the network and IT resources and/or Services (based on scope). This is a closed loop cycle combined with Sustain to drive the continued advancement of the network & IT resources and/or Services throughout its lifecycle.Figure 10 (a) – Create, Sustain, Evolve Value ChainA high-level description of the some of the key business process related to operations scope of the RFP solution are described in the following section. Dynamic event management & controlThe Dynamic Event Management and Control Service is about efficiently detecting potentially service impacting events, generating the associated alerts and initiate appropriate action. As much as possible potential service impacting events will be predicted and prevented before they do harm.The objectives for the Dynamic Event Management and Control Service are to:- Ensures that any meaningful event is detected as soon as possible.- Improve service availability by proactively eliminating service outages and resolve critical issues by triggering service management processes and automated remediation options.- Understand the root cause by transforming events into actionable alerts and incidents using advanced machine learning techniques.- Predict and Prevent Service Impact by utilizing machine learning algorithms, preconfigured logic, and Service Management contextual data, which automatically reduces alert noise, prioritizes events, identifies root cause, and predicts outages before they occur and/or impacts customer experience.- Execute constantly real time performance and capacity monitoring, and to provide data for the related processes and activities.- Handle the external incidents tickets raised from the Customer Service Desk, Enterprise User, Help Desk or Customer Care or from other internal areas.  Figure 10 (b) – Dynamic Event Management & Control Process FlowChange managementChange Management is the process responsible to control the introduction and implementation of changes in the most efficient manner, while minimizing the negative impact on customers (Service, Infrastructure) when changes are implemented.The mission of the Change Management process is to aid the business operations to seamlessly move towards 'Zero-Touch' operations by ensuring the correct checkpoints are set where the aim is to bring direct impact to the Business, by delivering early realization of the benefits of risk mitigation, with savings of time and money.  Figure 10 (c) – Change Management Process FlowSmart problem managementSmart Problem Management is the process responsible for managing the lifecycle of all Problems. The primary goal of Smart Problem Management is to prevent Problems and resulting Incidents from happening, to eliminate recurring Incidents and to minimize the impact of incidents that cannot be prevented.Smart Problem Management seeks to get to the Root Cause of Incidents and then initiate actions to improve or correct the situation. The Smart Problem Management process has both Reactive and Data Driven Predictive aspects. The Reactive aspect is concerned with solving Problems in response to one or more Incidents. Predictive part uses Data driven Machine learning to generate insights towards interfacing processes to address the prediction and prevent service impact.Figure 10 (d) – Smart Problem Management Process FlowPreventive maintenancePreventive Maintenance Process is the process to define, schedule and execute preventive maintenance activities (like health checkups, backups, clock synchronization etc.) for all Ooredoo resources (equipment, applications, etc.) under MS scope to increase reliability and avoid unplanned maintenance.The mission of the Preventive Maintenance process is to predict the future condition of equipment, applications, Services or resources and initiate preventive actions to enhance reliability and overall availability of the Ooredoo Infrastructure and Services. The aim of Preventive Maintenance Process is to determine in advance the need for maintenance services, increasing the availability time and useful time of equipment, and reducing the amount of unplanned emergency work. It will also increase the confidence level in performance by predicting the probability of failure, as well as the useful lifetime expectancy of the equipment and the conditions needed for maximizing that time.Figure 10 (e) – Preventive Maintenance Process FlowPerformance management & optimizationPerformance Management and Optimization is a continuous process throughout Managed Services contract lifecycle to ensure Service Architecture Operating at regular Service Levels based on agreed business needs. It covers the performance of Ooredoo infrastructure, the Services that are delivered across that infrastructure and the performance of those Services as the Ooredoo’s end-customer perceives them.Performance Management and Optimization provides the functions to evaluate and report upon the behavior and effectiveness of Ooredoo’s infrastructure (services and resources). Its role is to gather and analyze statistical data for the purpose of monitoring and correcting the behavior and effectiveness of the services provided through telecom and IS/IT networks and applications, and its constituent resources.Figure 10 (f) – Performance Management & Optimization Process FlowIncident management Incident management is a service operation process within sustain value chain. The goal is to restore a service to normal operation as quickly as possible and to minimize the impact on business and operations, thus ensuring that the best possible levels of service quality and availability are maintained.The mission of the Incident Management process is to restore normal service operation as quickly as possible after a disruption in a way that creates as little negative impact on the business as possible by leveraging automations like but not limited to incident auto assignment, auto assignment notifications, auto SLA notifications and registering of solution in Knowledge Base for reuse leading to faster incident response time.Figure 10 (g) – Incident Management Process FlowIncident handling for OoredooIncident Management is the process group designed to restore normal service operations (within the SLA limits) as quick as possible and to minimize the adverse impact on Ooredoo's business operations, thus ensuring that the best possible levels of service quality and availability are maintained. • In the NOC (1st Level Operations) the Network Surveillance application receives alarm notifications from the network which can be transformed to a Trouble ticket• As an alternative an incident can also be initiated by an end user who contacts Ooredoo’s Customer Care Center or Ericsson Service Desk (for premium B2B/ B2C customers) to inform that his/her service is faulty. The Customer Care/ Service Desk will assign the fault/incident to the Ericsson front office (1st Level Operations) team. • The 1st Level Operations will perform an initial analysis to identify the location of the fault and to determine if the problem is service affecting. 1st Level Operations will try to resolve the fault and might dispatch a Field Technician if required. In case 1st Level is unable to solve the fault, the Trouble Ticket will be escalated to the 2nd Level Operation for more in-depth analysis. • Customer Care is also informed in advance if there is a possibly service affecting problem. The Incident Manager handles communication with the 2nd level operation and Customer Care.• 2nd Level identifies the root cause of the problem using the Fault manager, Network Inventory Manager and Element Managers and assigns a field technician to repair the fault, when needed. The assignment is done with a Work Order. The dispatch of a Field Technician will be managed by 1st Level Operations through the local Ericsson dispatch team in each OpCo which in turn will raise the Work Order to the FSP dispatch center.• The Field Technician picks up spare parts and replaces the faulty equipment. The Network Inventory Manager is used to locate and reserve spares and to update network configuration status after the repair. Via the Ticketing System he informs the 2nd Level operation that the faults have been repaired. • First Level Operation will monitor the alarm status and in case of clearance will check with root cause responsible team (Field Technician, second level operation, etc.) for confirmation to close the ticket in the Ticketing System.• 2nd level notifies the 1st Level Operations that the problem is fixed by clearing the trouble ticket in the Ticketing System.• The 1st Level Operations informs Ooredoo’s Customer Care that the customer problem is fixed by closing the trouble ticket• The Customer Care informs the customer that the problem is resolved.The incident handling, communication flow and escalation timelines for the above processes is illustrated below –  Figure 10 (h) – Incident Handling & Communication FlowFigure 10 (i) – Incident Life Cycle & Timelines(3) Business Configurations (PCN) on IN Charging SystemThis section illustrates the Ericsson Charging System Nodes Business configurations changes also termed as PCN (Product configurations). Business Configurations work-package would be primarily responsible for the delivery of Standard and simple demands from Ooredoo.Business Configurations CRs (Simple and Standard) are the categories where code development is not required and where configurations are exclusively done through use of utilities provided by the IN applications. These simple and standard business configurations are very frequently needed to be implemented to meet business demands and in a quick turnaround time. Demands resulting into business configurations that need code changes or where development efforts are more than 5 Man-Days will be excluded from the scope of Business Configuration Services and will be treated as Change Requests, handled under an ADM framework which is outside the scope of this proposal.       Following types of changes would be considered under Business Configurations:• Addition/Modification of new products and services• Addition/Modification of tariffs, rate plans.• Addition and modification of Users access and privileges• Configuration of new services request typesThe service elements included in the business configuration are the following:Demand Support• Requirements and impact analyses• Technical feasibility study• Effort estimationBusiness Configuration Testing• Unit/Component/System test• Functional Testing for new business configuration h	Figure 11 – PCN Request FlowBusiness Configuration SizingEricsson proposes a base demand model for the services in scope. BDV stands for Base Demand Volume which is the assumed capacity in blended Man Days to be consumed by Ooredoo to cover the business configuration CRs. To keep the demand management and demand acceptance to a reasonable level, the annual BDV bucket would be equally distributed over 12 months. This will ensure that qualified resources are planned to a certain extent hence bringing efficiency into Ooredoo business configurations execution.We are proposing on the charging system applications in scope a business configurations capacity of 50 Man Days/Month for Ooredoo in each of Kuwait and Oman OpCo, this would be required to regulate the demand at every stage of the CRs lifecycle. Should Ooredoo desire to increase the BDV capacity (expressed in number of man days/month), Ooredoo needs to notify Ericsson 3 months in advance to allow Ericsson to adapt the team size and the additional commercials to be discussed and agreed mutually.Demand Management Lifecycle:Ericsson proposes to have a quarterly review of the planned demand (business configuration requests). Quarterly forecast is a must from Ooredoo on the upcoming demands 3 months in advance so that Ericsson can plan and mobilize resources accordingly. Therefore, on a quarterly basis and during the first week of the quarter, a capacity planning workshop will be scheduled between Ericsson and Ooredoo ‘s demand managers where the business configurations roadmap for the following quarter will be discussed.(4) Global Ericsson Optimization OrganizationEricsson has about 6730 optimization experts, solution architects, subject matter experts and engineers spread across the globe. About 306 Optimization resources are based in Middle East & Africa. Around 275 engineers work in Research and development (R&D) building machine learning use cases and developing AI based optimization platforms as well as automation modules. 165 experts have end-to-end competence and form the strategic competence unit supporting all market areas. Ericsson will engage its skilled resources for multi-domain, multi-technology, multi-vendor delivery in Ooredoo.Ericsson Optimization team follows standardized ways of working across delivery units, countries and operators using structured processes and methods. Ericsson’s key advantages are:• Global leadership in mobile broadband network technology• Global presence and industry-leading experience in network optimization services.• Strong local presence and competence in main markets• Industry leadership and global presence in managed services optimization• Full access to Ericsson’s Global Service Centers and Competence Hubs for end-to-end technology expertise• Industry-leading portfolio of optimization solutions, already proven in several Operations• Advanced methodologies for End-to-End (E2E) network optimizationFigure 12 Ericsson Global Optimization OrganizationOG dedicated Ericsson Optimization OrganizationEricsson shall deploy high caliber expertise from its global organization to manage and improve OG network performance as well as end subscriber perceived quality of services.Figure 13 Ericsson Managed Service Optimization Team – Proposed OrganizationBelow is a brief description of the roles.Optimization Manager: Main point of contact towards OG management, fully accountable for optimization scope and service components deliverables as per the agreed service level agreement (SLA) and responsibility matrix (RM)Technology team: Subject Matter Experts, Solution Architects and Engineers with advanced skills to handle daily optimization activities as well as strategic plans for improving OG network performance and end-to-end quality of service. The experts will be distributed across domains (Core, Transport, RAN) and technologies (3G, 4G, 5G, FWA, IoT). The RAN optimization will be subdivided into 2 large pools one dedicated for Huawei RAN and another for Ericsson RAN.Customer Quality team: a function to handle optimization related to customer complaints, end-to-end troubleshooting of quality of service (QoS) and user experience. Ericsson understands the need of collaboration between NPO, NOC and SOC teams and will make sure to have full synergies cross domains. Field experience measurements team: to support the technology team and customer quality team by handling field related activities from RF measurements, outdoor drive test, indoor walk test, interference hunting, benchmarking, complaints field check. Team will also handle post processing of logfiles and generating field insights reports.Cognitive Solutions Team: a function to lead the deployment of Ericsson cognitive software platform, coordinate to develop Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning (ML) use cases for OG specific optimization, manage data analytics, collaborate with global team developers to make use of various OG network data sources, and automate the daily routine activities and bring efficiencies year over year to the optimization delivery organization.Figure 14 Ericsson Managed Services Optimization Team - Matrix OrganizationEricsson proposes to form teams working cross domains for end-to-end troubleshooting, network performance improvement and user experience enhancement.Thus, no teams will be working in silos. Radio, Transport, Core, Customer Quality, Cognitive Solutions and Field teams shall collaborate daily to make sure OG subscribers have the best quality of experience among mobile subscribers in the respective opco.This dynamic organization will allow faster resolution of network issues and proper investigation of degradation disregarding in which domain it happens.Figure 15 Ericsson Optimization Team collaboration and Coordination with various teamsEricsson is ready to coordinate and collaborate with various OG departments and contribute to the success of OG various demands and projects. As per RFP requirements, there will be multiple instances where SOC will support with measurements/data/reports and NPO will perform analysis, and provide optimization recommendations while implementation will always be done in conjunction with SOC.Ericsson Optimization team is a reliable partner when and where needed, Ericsson team shall be in continuous communication with other vendors and 3rd party products (3PP) existing in OG network via OG opco management or directly. Ericsson team will learn and indulge OG internal processes and procedures, Ericsson team will also bring global best practices to improve those processes and procedures and stabilize routine ways of working over the contract duration.The teams will be structured into four pools of resources based on the resource competence – first pool comprising of RAN optimization for Oman & Kuwait, the second pool for RAN optimization for Qatar, the third pool of resources focusing on analytics and automation and finally the fourth pool for transmission and core optimization across all the three OpCos. The onshore and offshore distribution of resources is as shown below –				Figure 15 (i)– NPO Pool Delivery Model				Figure 15 (ii) – Onshore Delivery Model     (5) Key Performance Indicators     To make sure the NOC related activities are prioritized right and are well aligned with S-KPI’s and other key criteria, Ericsson proposes to jointly define and agree on the KPI’s during the Establishment Phase. An initial proposal on the KPI’s is as follows -Trouble Ticket handling time.EmergencyCriticalMajorMinor/ Non-Service AffectingResponse Time≤15 mins≤ 15 mins≤ 15 mins≤ 2 hoursRestoration time ≤ 4 hours≤ 6 hours≤ 12 hours≤ 1 weekResolution Time≤ 48 hours≤ 48 hours≤ 96 hours≤ 2-3 weeksTargetBaselining ActualBaselining ActualBaselining ActualBaselining ActualTable 6: SLAChange request handling time.Measurement Attributes \ SeverityCriticalMajorMinorNon-Service AffectingEmergencyNotification Time≥ 5 days≥ 5 days≥ 3 days≥ 3 daysImmediateResponse Time≤ 2 days≤2 days≤ 1 day≤1 dayImmediateResolution Time(3days)within ‘Earliest Start Time’ &‘Latest end Time’(3days)within ‘Earliest Start Time’ &‘Latest end Time’(2day)within ‘Earliest Start Time’ &‘Latest end Time’In the First maintenance windowTable 7: Handling Time     For more details on the SLA/ KPIs as well as network availability and performance KPIs, kindly refer to Ericsson statement of compliance to Network MS_Schedule 20_SLA and KPI_v5.     (6) Global Ericsson SCO Operations: Ericsson proposes Service Centric Operation to address its end-to-end customer experience management requirements. The Ericsson offering includes resources for managing the Service Quality Operations & advanced tool to support SCO management. The proposed solution will be operated and managed by the SCO experts to provide knowledge and insights about the service performance experienced by Opco customers and addressing service-related issues quicker. It will contribute to a faster, more informed decision-making process to create a positive customer experience, boost customer satisfaction, and enable you to gain a competitive edge in the marketplace.  QoE Index provides an important insight on what is important to a customer with respect to priorities. This helps in focusing and channelizing the efforts in managing the Customer perception in a more systematic way.  The SCO will help to design & calibrate such QoE index model based on objective KQIs & KPIs. As part of the proposal, Ericsson will establish the SCO solution for Opco which includes SCO management for a period of 5 years. Every SCO solution is made of the below building blocks; S-KPIs, SCO Tools, Workflows (Processes) and an organization to focus on end-user’s experience.  The key function of the Managed CEM operations team is to perform data analytics and generating insights which can be used for the following sample use cases: 1. Customer Experience Improvement a. Monitoring Service KPIs (S-KPIs) covering non-encrypted KPI’s. b. App Specific Performance Monitoring and RCA up to Device, Website, Content Provider etc. c. Identifying High Data Usage/Popular Apps/Services/Games d. Proactive monitoring of Service KPIs for these Apps/Services e. Device Analytics 2. Network Performance Improvement Insights a. App Specific Performance Monitoring and RCA up to Device, Website, Content b. Network Performance Improvement Insights c. Network KPI variation Impact on User Experience d. Identifying issues and suggesting Changes…etc. 3. Data Monetization Insights a. Identifying High Data Usage/Popular Apps/Services/Games b. Proactive monitoring of Service KPIs for these Apps/Services c. Segmentation of subscribers based upon usage behavior d. Inputs for targeted Marketing to promote various data plans  e. Inputs for Cross-Selling/Up-Selling…etc. 4. Recommendation on Smart NW Planning a. Suggesting New Site/Carrier Addition planning based upon Data Usage /Device Penetration/ VIP user/ High ARPU User, etc. 5. Crowd Sourcing Based Benchmarking a. Identify competitor weak coverage areas. b. Customer experience improvement by analyzing user samples having degraded KPIs.        SCO Organizational Structure       The following diagram shows the high-level SCO organizational structure. The competence requirements for a SCO solution are different to that of a NOC due to the type of business value a SCO needs to deliver. SCO team will comprise experts who have both an understanding of customer experience management and a technical background in telecoms.                                                                                                                            Figure 16 - SCO Functional Organization       1st Level Service Operation This function provides surveillance on all aspects of the in-scope services & underlying components needed to deliver the service. The function is to combine automated detection of Service Events with human guidance and as the result of this process it is expected that human intervention effort is kept at a minimum. This team is composed of skilled humans using the SCO Platform capabilities to move from reactive to predictive operations. They are not only there to monitor and deal with exceptions that the automation cannot deal with, but also to oversee the automation machine, ensuring that the automations are working well and delivering the performance required. The Dynamic Event Management and Control process is used to efficiently interpret any detectable occurrence which includes three levels of alerting; Reactive, Proactive and Predictive service impacting conditions that has significance to the management of Services, evaluating its dimension and impact, and to initiate the appropriate control action. Service Monitoring responsibilities: Coordinate, support, manage & execute 1st Level proactive & reactive maintenance including: • 24/7 Service monitoring for agreed SKPIs and Use Cases • 1st Level investigation • Track & Manage End-User Problems • Determine event criticality • Event correlation • Incident escalation • Manage resolution • Follow NOC to SOC & SOC to NOC communication to improve overall TAT. • Support & communication with Opco Customer Care • Service Outage Notification through Opco Customer Care • Escalate all non-resolved faults to 2nd Level SCO • SPOC to handle VIP/Business Customers complaints raised by Opco CC/BO   Figure 17 - NOC-SOC-NOC Prioritization of IncidentCompetencies: • Event Management  • 1st Level Incident Management.  • 1st Level Service Quality Experience Management. • Basic knowledge of mobile services GSM / WCDMA / LTE / VoLTE/ 5G • Customer Event Management • Drive customer Incident Management • Customer Problem Management • Customer Order Handling • The Customer Fault Management is the legacy element which works closely with Opco Customer Care Organization, providing support for customer issues that require technical support & investigation. • Service Experience Management is new to the model and reflects proactive front-line service quality experience related activities seeking to identify potential customer issues before they become real. This new capability will be gradually created during the Operate phase by introducing new automation Use Cases.  To cascade information during incident management & Continuous improvement initiatives the touch points with Customer care & other Business verticals within Opco will be followed as described below: Figure 18 - Service Incident Process flow             Customer Experience Analyst This is the function providing technical expertise and capability for 2nd Level diagnosis (2nd Level Service Operation), including conducting service degradation Root Cause Analysis and determination of Next Best Action. A secondary function is to maintain a knowledge base, the Known Events DB. They execute proactive & reactive service quality management activities that require a higher level of expertise conducting deep-dive analysis for finding the root cause of service degradations triggered by Service Monitoring or Customer Care. This team ensures that the services are continuously available & performing to SLA. Main responsibilities: • Escalation support from 1st Level Service Monitoring. • 2nd level S-KPI deep-dive investigations for determining Root Cause and Next Best Action • Service and Resource KPI correlation • Escalation to NOC and Optimization expertise as required • Escalation to SQM/SCO Analysts for advanced trend and pattern analysis  • Knowledge base Management • SQM Use Case initiation for development of models • Subscriber behavior-based segmentation  Competencies: • Deep knowledge of services • Good understanding of interfaces  • Good understanding and interpretation of Service Performance indicators. • Understanding of Different Vendor Performance Reporting Tool  • Knowledge in Automation These services will be provided by resources from onshore & offshore and will be available on 8x5 Egypt time and on call basis for P1 incidents.        Reporting and Data Analyst       Overall mission is to support the creation of Service Quality insights and to establish data as a key asset in enhancing decision making in SCO. A core capability is to deliver advanced business intelligence through the extensive use of advanced analytics & visualization techniques. Main responsibilities: • Specialist visualization & reporting on data & insights for making better decisions Competencies: • Basic reporting skillset enhanced with SQM understanding • Data Analytics and Data Scientists skillset             Business Analyst This function combines SQM/CEM, Data Analyst and Business Consultant skill sets for providing valuable insights for Opco Marketing department. The insights can address smart customer insights for supporting customer retention initiatives, service usage reports and trend analysis or service quality insights reports and trend analysis. Competencies: • SQM/CEM, Data Analyst and Business Consultant skill set • Revenue Analytics • SWOT Analytics • Commercial Understanding      SCO Interfaces:      SCO will require several business interfaces to deliver the operations. These will mandate working and operational level agreements (WLA / OLA) to ensure a smooth and timely exchange of information. As part of the Mobilization Phase, it is recommended workshops are held between Opco and Ericsson stakeholders to align requirements and ways of working.  Figure 19 - SCO InterfacesSCO Interfaces to other Service Delivery Units & Close loop Automation:  Flow # Description 1 SCO Contact Center will be the interface towards Customer Care both proactive (i.e., service degradation may occur due to plan activities) and reactive (customer complaint handling from CC). 2 SCO through SQM will perform analysis and incident demarcation; in case of a Service alarm due to a Network Fault, a ticket will be dispatched to NOC.  SCO's main responsibility is to ensure quality of Customer Facing Services (CFS) while NOC is responsible for Resource Facing Services (RFS).  Plan and build of resources (NE) are connected to NOC according to RFS concept. In case of Service Problems SCO may also directly contact the design team. NOC is main responsible and driver for incident, problem and change management. SCO is supporting and aligned with NOC processes. 3 Based on point 2. In case the service alarm/degradation is not related with Network Faults; a ticket will be dispatched to Optimization. SCO will decide where the ticket should be rerouted in case any dispute between NOC and Optimization. 4 SCO will monitor and raise a ticket in case of problems with OTT services. 5 Business Management requests a new service for the service catalogue, SCO will model, test, and maintain the Service and agreed Service-KPI in the SCO Platform according to the requirements and considering agreed Change Management process 6 SCO tests and maintains services of the Service Catalog and the Service-KPI defined in the SCO Platform during the lifetime of delivering the Service Operations. 7 Assuring SCO performance and contract management. 8 SCO retrieves network information so they can monitor service performance 9 Embrace cognitive & ML/AI capabilities to evolve SCO delivery by data driven approach. 10 Considering a User specific problem, close loop will work as # Subscriber incident detection, Alarm & TT creation, Root cause analysis, workflow actuation & cause validation. The close loop will lead to continuous improvement of User life cycle.                Table 8: SCO Interface  (7) IPR and Data ProvisionRegulatory requirements and changesOoredoo at its own cost shall:• comply with all laws and regulations and obtain and maintain all governmental or authority approvals or registrations that are necessary for Ooredoo’s business operations.Ericsson will at its own cost: • comply with all legislative enactments and regulatory requirements• obtain and maintain all governmental or authority approvals or registrations, that are necessary for Ericsson providing the Services.Ericsson is not liable for Ooredoo’s obligations above in this section. Ooredoo will notify Ericsson of any law or regulation change that may be reasonably expected to impact the Services and will identify and assist Ericsson in obtaining each approval or registration required for Ericsson to perform its obligations under this agreement. For each such change, the parties will agree in good faith upon reasonable adjustments to any Service, Service Level, or Service Charge that is impacted. The parties will agree such changes in accordance with the change control procedures.Data provisionsDefinitions“Customer Data” means all data (including Personal Data), which is owned or controlled by Customer, and which is relevant for the performance of Services under the Agreement. Customer data includes Outputs as per definition below.“End User” means any subscriber(s) of Customer. “Personal Data” means any information that can be related to an identified or identifiable living natural person ('data subject'). An identifiable person is one who can be identified, directly or indirectly, by reference to an identification number or to one or more factors specific to its physical, physiological, mental, economic, cultural, or social identity. “Ericsson Analytics Data” means all data gained, generated, developed and/or derived by Ericsson or Ericsson Affiliate, from or as a result of, the performance of Services under the Agreement, including but not limited to data models, trained algorithms, analytics & machine learnings models, insights, use cases, automated processes, software tools, methods, ideas, concepts, know-how and/or intelligent systems (including intellectual property therein). For the purposes of clarity, Ericsson Analytics Data includes any data gained, generated, developed and/or derived by Ericsson or Ericsson Affiliate from the use of Customer Data. “Outputs”: means deliverable outputs generated specifically for the Customer or a Customer Party from the performance of data analytics on Customer Data and other data sources comprising,the data contained within reports on (i) performance indicators, (ii) time series analysis, and (iii) trending, actionable predictions and recommendations, alarm correlations, and Customer Network change requests.Ericsson use of automated processes, intelligent systems, and sub-processors Ericsson uses Ericsson and third-party software tools and automated processes and intelligent systems, including robotic process automation, run book automation and machine learning & artificial intelligence for the purposes of providing Services under this Agreement. Ericsson uses such software tools and automated processes in accordance with Good Industry Practice and is free to determine which sub-contractors, tools, and automated processes it uses, but always delivering Services in accordance with the agreed Service Levels. Ericsson will document descriptions of the automated processes implemented to deliver the Services. Services are only available if Ericsson has rights to Customer Data as set out in this Agreement. Ericsson will only use such Customer Data in accordance with this Agreement. Ericsson may use an employee, contractor or facility in any place where an Ericsson Affiliate or any contractor is located, and Ericsson is liable for the performance. Customer appoints Ericsson to perform any such transfer and consents for Ericsson to appoint such processors or sub processors. Ericsson use right to Customer Data Customer grants Ericsson and its Affiliates a perpetual, non-exclusive, worldwide, paid up right to access, collect, copy, process, store, consolidate, analyze, anonymize, pseudonymize, transmit, transfer and use, Customer Data, uploaded or created or generated from or as a result of the Service, for (a) normal operation and support of the Service and to fulfil this Agreement; (b) Ericsson’s testing, researching, developing, manufacturing, offering and selling products or services including but not limited to automation; and (c) compiling and analyzing such Customer Data in an aggregated, pseudonymized and/or anonymized format, to prepare Ericsson reports, analysis or other work resulting from such compilation and analysis. Ericsson’s rights under this section are always subject to applicable laws and regulatory requirements, including applicable data privacy laws for the Personal Data. Ericsson may not share the Customer Data with any third party except where Ericsson engages sub-contractors in performing the activities under (a) to (c) above.Ericsson rights to use Customer feedback If Customer provides Ericsson with any suggestion or feedback to enhance or modify the Service (excluding Customer’s Data), Customer grants Ericsson and its Affiliates a worldwide, perpetual, non-exclusive and royalty free license to use and incorporate such feedback into the Service or products or similar services. Customer’s feedback is provided ‘as is and Customer makes no warranty about it nor has any liability to Ericsson or its Affiliates for it.Personal Data Processing Ericsson and Customer will obtain and maintain all necessary permissions under applicable law and regulatory requirements that each party must have to access, collect, copy, process, store, consolidate, analyze, anonymize, pseudonymize transmit, transfer, and use Personal Data. Customer will obtain all necessary consents from, or make all necessary notifications to, any customer and/or End User to allow Ericsson and/or its sub-contractors to lawfully use and process Personal Data under this Agreement. Ericsson’s obligations under this section are always subject to Customer’s obligations in this subsection. Upon request each Party will enter into any additional data processing or transfer agreement that is required under the applicable data protection laws for such transfer or sub-processing (such additional agreements being subject to the terms of this Agreement).Ericsson Ownership of Intellectual PropertyEricsson or its Affiliates are always and remain owner of all rights in and to:• the Services, any documentation provided by Ericsson under this Agreement.• any graphics or content included in (a) above (including certain data set out below); • all underlying software, and other materials that operate the Services (including any software tool or intelligent systems, models and algorithms and automation processes).• Ericsson Analytics Data.• any modification, enhancement or derivative work made of (a) through (d) above. • All Intellectual Property and other rights in the above shall be owned by Ericsson and the Customer acquires no intellectual property or other rights thereto.• Exit provision upon Expiry or Termination of the AgreementUpon the Agreement expiring or terminating for any reason, Ericsson, if and as agreed under the Exit Plan Schedule, grants to Ooredoo, a limited, non-exclusive, non-transferable, non-sub- licensable, royalty-free license to a written description of the standard process definitions in the form of an operations manual comprising of: • high level descriptions of automation rules that Ericsson has developed to deliver the Services• high level descriptions of the machine learning/artificial intelligence use cases developed to deliver the Services• interface descriptions for integrations Ericsson performs between Ericsson automated process tools and Customer systems to deliver the Services. Solely for the purpose of (i) assisting the Customer in the transition of Services from Ericsson and (ii) operating the Customer’s network. The information shared shall be in a form readable by humans (not source code). Customer does not receive any right to use or obtain Ericsson-owned or licensed Ericsson Analytics Data, including but not limited to:• any source or programming code and its implementation• designs, specifications, and architectures relating to Ericsson’s tools and/ processes.
A. Customer Value Driven Operating ModelIn the following paragraphs, Ericsson will detail its commitment to managing OG opcos for the listed high-level scopes as per Ericsson statement of compliance for Network MS_Schedule_4 & Partially MS_Schedule_3 (CEM Deliverables).This section describes how Ericsson will build a model to calibrate right set of KPIs and train this model with the right set of data to proactively predict NW related churn. Ericsson will set up a Service Operations Centre (SOC) to meet Ooredoo expectations. The subsequent paragraphs in this section describe how the SOC organization will be set up along with the use cases which will be deployed by them (including NPS measurement/ analysis and Customer experience per Dollar) to improve customer experience.1) Service Centric Operation Proposal OverviewPart of offering Ericsson’s Managed SCO is built across four core principles highlighted in the diagram below: Figure 20 - SCO building blocks.• Data Modelling & Use cases: The data modelling is built on Ericsson research carried in identifying the key satisfaction points subscribers have when using operator services. This provides for a set of Service and Resource KPIs that accurately measure service quality. • Tools & Data sources: SCO platform is based on the probes, data correlation, aggregation and reporting modules that will be integrated into the Opco’s network.  • Operational Process: SCO will be built using relevant and best practice aspects of both ETOM and ITIL processes integrated with Opcos ways of working.• Competence: SCO will be built using specific competence in the areas of customer experience and Engineering to ensure insights and problems are isolated, analyzed and acted upon as quickly and close to source as possible. Key principle for building Service centric operation solution evolves around:                                                                             Figure 21 - Delivery Model Approach       Value Proposition:            • Ericsson relies on its global capabilities to deliver value-added services in SCO with our highly skilled professionals and a complete portfolio of services and tools.• Ericsson global organization has strong SCO organization, with skilled resources for Multi domain, Multi technology and multi-vendor requirements. • A centralized global entity responsible of keeping the multi-Vendor competence updated according to the latest technology/ releases. The teams working in multi-Vendor projects are getting awareness sessions on regular basis to keep them up to date.• Ericsson is keen to be a partner for SCO delivery with Ooredoo team working together to enhance mobile subscriber’s experience with future proof data driven operations.                                                   Figure 22 - Factors impacting end-user experience.  2) Operating Model:      Customer Experience Delivery function is integrated with Ericsson overall delivery model. Where we will have dedicated business owner for Service centric operation.                                 Figure 23 – Operating Model           Competence:  Ericsson team will manage the SCO operations under its Managed Services delivery model to make sure the complete delivery is focused on end users’ experience. The main functions within the proposed organization are:  Service Owner: Overall responsible for S-KPIs E2E performance, modelling, and improvement of Service Experience. Owner of business outcomes defined by the Opco key KPI to achieve operational excellence. Service Operations Reliability: Responsible for Service KPI Monitoring, Fault Management & Incident Management. Managing the assurance of the S-KPIs in case of fault & incidents. If any of the S-KPIs degrades below the performance commitments, this function will Open a Trouble Ticket with the team responsible for the resolution (For example, if a RAN related incident caused an S-KPI degradation, then they will be open a Trouble Ticket towards RAN Back Office team).  Service Operations Architect: Responsible for driving the assurance of the S-KPIs. If any of the S-KPIs degrades below the performance commitments, this function will do the required Root Cause Analysis to identify the domain (e.g., RAN, Core, Transport, OTT, User Device) that has caused the S-KPI. If any of the S-KPIs degrades below the performance commitments, this function will do the required Root Cause Analysis to identify the domain (e.g., RAN, Core, Transport, OTT, User Device) that has caused the S-KPI degradation. Support Customer Problem Management & follow up for resolution. Service Performance Improvement: Responsible for the continuous improvement of the S-KPIs. This function will work closely with Opco’s Network optimization team, External interfaces to provide timely insights related to network improvements.           3) Enhanced Processes: Ericsson SCO organization must adopt the established processes (workflows) to deliver service centric operations. To have a common frame of reference, SCO processes are based on relevant parts of ETOM and ITIL, which are well-established industry standard service management framework.             Business Processes: Business processes will be used for the development and management of use cases and requires the interaction between the SCO team and Opco’s other stakeholders. The primary processes include: • Use case development • Use case performance assessment • Use case retirement • Use case change management These generic processes are well-already established industry standards but will need to be customized for specific interaction. Ericsson sees this as having a minimal impact on the Opco’s operations.             Operational Processes: Operational processes are integrated into operational governance and are mapped to Ericsson standard process framework. The generic processes are already well-established and will be mapped to include Opco’s business interfaces, as required. The core processes will cover: Service Transition: Identification of new requirements that are needed to launch new service packages and associated services. Service Assurance: Service Event Management: detects occurrences (events) significant to the performance and quality of subscriber services. It evaluates the scope and scale of any service impact and initiates appropriate control actions. Service Incident Management: supports in the restoration of the service quality of subscriber services by ensuring appropriate interfaces are notified. Service Change Management supports all changes in the network and impact on S-KPIs. Service Problem Management supports the prevention of incidents from happening, eliminating recurring incidents and minimizing the impact of incidents that cannot be prevented. It seeks to get to the root cause of incidents and initiates actions to improve or avoid similar situations occurring. Continual Service Improvement: Continually evaluating the CEM, both as an organization and the services it delivers ensuring it evolves to continually deliver value.             4) Managing Customer Experience Per Dollar“If you know what your customers are doing, you’ll know what you can do for your customers”. Defining a frame work with “Per $”, needs complete organization to have a common strategy from Technology to Business. Understand your customer's needs: To provide an exceptional customer experience, you need to understand your customer's needs and expectations. Conduct customer research to identify their pain points and what they value most.Defining customer experience strategy: Develop a customer experience strategy that aligns with Opcos brand and customer needs. Determine what kind of experience you want to deliver, and what channels you will use to engage with your customers.Streamline your processes: Look for ways to streamline your processes to make them more efficient and cost-effective. For example, you could automate some of your customer service tasks, such as responding to frequently asked questions to avoid resulting them in a complaint.Train employees: Invest in training of employees to deliver a great customer experience. Make sure they understand your customer experience strategy and how to interact with customers in a way that aligns with Opcos brand.Use customer feedback to improve: Monitor customer feedback (NPS Response) and use it to improve your customer experience as Outside-IN view. Identify areas where you can make improvements and take action to address them with short & long term action plan.Implement cost-effective solutions: Look for cost-effective solutions that can help you deliver a great customer experience. For example, you could use chatbots to provide basic customer service or self-service options to reduce the need for human interaction at Service Desk. At the same time- adding 5G network to meet Online gamer latency requirement.Measure your success: Use metrics to measure the success of customer experience efforts. For example, you could measure customer satisfaction, customer retention, and customer lifetime value (NPS & Customer Journey).The frame work & Operation model captures: there are 2 ways of optimizing the Cx Per $: Reduce the Operation Cost or Increase Base/ Revenue.By following these approach, we can manage end customer experience per dollar and ensure that our customers are satisfied while keeping costs under control.Ericsson understands Ooredoo focus on Customer Experience per dollar and proposes the following model to address this requirement –Step1: Building the logic for reaching Node based CEI.- Ericsson understand the Ooredoo focus on Asset optimization & Customer expeirence Per $.- Experience KPI for users is dyanmic in nature as “Attached site/cell” will yield differently for end subscriber.- As user moves from Point-A to B, it’s practically not feasible to define the “Expeirence KPI” maintained for each user & each location.- Thus, we approach to optimize the Node experience perceived by end Subscriber.- In-side out view “Customer Index” will be created from- Cx KPI, Performance KPI, Complaint count & Infra avialability.- Out-side in view “Customer Index” will be created from “No. of Detractor” associated with node.- Multi weightage model will be injested with different KPI’s & Application.- As Ooredoo principal- we can’t fulfull 100% subscriber experience & we believe in the understanding. So we will Focus on on heavy to intense & extreme customer who generate around 40-60% of the network traffic with associated Node.                                          Figure 24 (a-2) – Cx Per $ Model Building Blocks                                        Figure 24 (a-1) – Cx Per $ Model Building BlockStep2: Build/Develop the Model to identify the area/Node to focus.                          Figure 24 (b) – Cx Per $ Model ways to CalculateStep3: UC deployment/ Front end view for Tower Next best Action & recommendation- Site-level Classification of Towers across Zones based on Payload Util. and THP Sector.- Drill-down to CX (Customer Experience) Score across Sites and the possible Recommendations Categories based on the Recommendation Matrix. - Upon selection of Recommendation Category, identify the existing Revenue of the Towers and the Proposed Recommendations across each Site.               Figure 24 (C) – Measuring Nodes with highest Impact Subs     Step-4: Action Plan & Impact assement of identified Low CEI score Nodes.- Ensuring Asset ROA optimizatin & “Invest Where it Matters” approach on identifed low CEI nodes.- Implement identified actions & Improve CEM Per $.                                    Figure 24 (d) – Measuring Nodes with highest Impact Subs                       Figure 24 (e) – Improved CEI Impacted Node                    5) Tools & Data Source:      i. NPS Tool Solution:• NPS CSSAT is expected to utilize for Customer experience improvement & reduce churn. Survey feed can be accepted with direct feed to NPS model, or any export file processed on specific path on agreed granularity.• Ericsson is offering its Advance AI-ML NPS Tool Suite to leverage the key principle.• The Net Promoter Score™ (NPS) is a customer loyalty metric that is used to gauge the loyalty of an organization's customer relationships by asking how likely the customer is to recommend the organization to others.  • The NPS is calculated based on responses to a single question: “On a scale of 0-10, How likely is it that you would recommend our company/services to a friend or colleague?”   By asking the likely-to-recommend question, organizations can track promoters and detractors, which provides them with a clear measurement of their performance through their customer's eyes. • For a successful and productive implementation of the NPS methodology, NPS must be correlated to specific operations and business drivers.  • Ericsson NPS Insights is a correlation and analytics solution to measure, track and predict the network NPS levels & CSAT. It implements technologies like advanced analytics, Artificial Intelligence & Machine Learning algorithms to predict the NPS the NPS based on the customer experience and network performance. • The solution correlates the low NPS level with the network KPIs to understand the main reason behind any degradation of the customer experience and provides an analysis highlighting the main KPIs responsible for poor service quality in each network cluster.  • Based on historical data analysis & trends, the NPS Insights system predicts the NPS level in each network cluster a few weeks earlier than is possible with conventional ways of working. The insights provided can then be used to take proactive actions and prioritize efforts to improve network quality to enhance the customer experience.              Drivers of the Network NPS  Network NPS is the calculated score of a subscriber’s experience based on network performance and service quality. Factors impacting the Network NPS level are shown in the figure below. It is mainly a combination of network quality experience, subscriber profile and other service touch points. As a single event is perceived differently by different customers the NPS methodology will take a network event and understand how it will impact specific subscribers based on their profiles. Figure 25 - Factors impacting Network NPS       NPS Insights solution overview       Ericsson NPS Insights implements Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning (AI/ML) algorithms to correlate the subscriber feedback received via surveys and network KPIs. The AI/ML model will be trained to focus on identifying anomalies in N/W KPIs like Coverage, CQI, Network Availability, Throughput etc. so that corrective actions can be initiated to improve the network quality & customer experience. The model uses the previous 1-4 weeks of Network performance data, aggregates KPI at various geographical levels and for various traffic time like 24 hours, Busy hours etc. to identify the anomalies in the Network performance and correlate it with subscriber feedback during same duration to understand impact of N/W quality degradation on customer satisfaction.  Fully trained model then starts predicting the future NPS score at the national, regional & cluster levels along with site classification for the upcoming NPS survey in advance.  The prediction accuracy of the model improves over time as more data i.e., NPS survey & Network performance information is fed into the system including the seasonality effect. The model quality is largely driven by two things – a) Availability of “feature sets”; KPIs or other attributes that relate to one’s loyalty b) Volume of NPS survey responses  Figure 26 - NPS Insights AI/ML model flow              Solution Architecture  Functional solution architecture of the NPS Insights solution is as shown in Figure-18 below.  The NPS Insights AI/ML engine for correlation of detractor’s responses with the network KPIs will be hosted on Ericsson Cloud Environment (ECE). As part of the service, Ericson will design, deploy & integrate the NPS Insights instance on Ericsson cloud environment & also provide team of experts which includes Data Scientist, and Data analysts, who will maintain and update the solution, and subsequently analyze the results and provide reports and insights to Opcos. The Survey Engine (feed) is assumed to take feed from Opcos existing NPS survey solution via standard data transfer procedure which is being done quarterly now.Figure 27 - Functional architecture  Note: The solution requires only anonymized data and all fields highlighting subscriber attributes must be dropped in the source file.              Data Requirements             Network NPS surveys  NPS Insights solution is required to be fed with survey results measuring subscriber satisfaction based on network quality, also called network NPS.  Survey responses will be aggregated at the cluster level network NPS measurement & tracking purpose.   The survey response file must have the following information: a. Subscribers' primary Site_id/Cell_id (mandatory) b. Survey question c. Subscriber response  d. Survey date/time e. Response date/time  f. Follow-up survey question (Detractors due to network issues) g. Subscriber response to follow-up survey(s)  The more survey results provided to Ericsson, the better the predictions, therefore it is recommended to have a minimum 2-3% respondents representative of the total subscriber base every quarter. Required file format is as below:             Network Performance KPIs Network performance KPIs, which will be used as feature sets in the NPS prediction model are also required. The following information is required: a. Network Performance KPIs: 2G/3G/4G/5G including Coverage, CQI & NWA KPIs b. Network Busy hour Performance KPIs: 2G/3G/4G/5G  c. 24 Hours aggregated at cell level d. Network KPI design benchmark (Urban/Rural/Metro)         Service KPIs (Video/Web/VoLTE services) Service KPIs, which will be used as feature sets in the NPS level prediction model are also required. The following information is required: a. Data Source: CEM solution/Probes b. Service KPIs for user services e.g., Web, Video etc. c. Daily aggregated at cell/cluster level  d. S-KPI benchmarks             Site Database /Network Topology Site data base including information on affiliation of Cells/Sites Latitude/Longitude with clusters, cities, and regions needs to be provided. File format for sharing the required input data is as follows: • File Format: Text/CSV • Frequency: Twice every week during operations phase • Historical Data: Last 6-9 months data dump at the time project kick off for model training.             Data Security The data issued to Ericsson will be stored and processed in the Ericsson Cloud Environment (ECE) within the EU.  The data in the ECE environment is fully secured and protected by implementing data encryption logics.  For data in transit, encryption is done via Transport Layer Security and for data at rest the encryption is achieved via Customer Managed Encryption Keys (CMEK). The stored data can only be accessed by authorized personnel only via Ericsson Corporate Network.  No personal data, e.g., MSISDN or IMSI, should be included in the network data or surveys sent to Ericsson. Opco will remain owner of all the data provided to Ericsson same will be destroyed by Ericsson after completion of the project.                    NPS Insights - Scope of Services             Service Deliverables As part of the service, following predictive & analytical insights will be shared with the required stakeholders on weekly/fortnightly basis so that they can plan the corrective actions to improve customer experience. • Classification of network clusters & sites predicted to have Bad Network NPS  • Identify Top-50 most degraded sites at national level  • Identify Top-10 most degraded sites at region/city level  • Identify Top-X sites impacted due to a particular KPI – Throughput, Packet loss, Interference, cell availability etc.  • KPI anomalies, number of breaches at site levels. • Most degraded KPIs at cell level with their individual impact  • Sentiment Analysis o AI/ML based word cloud for issue classification based on survey response text o Classification of respondent pain areas into Network & Non network factors at national level. o Geographical area specific Network & Non network factors to understand pain areas & experience o Promoter, Detractor & Passive cloud for better understanding of their expectations • NPS Survey analytics • NPS profiling based on Site & Subscriber segmentation parameters   • NPS tracking at National/regional/ Cluster/Site level • Top-5 worst NPS sites with analysis  • Top-5 improved clusters with analysis • Multi-dimensional analysis – NPS correlation with Traffic, Network availability, Complaints, Churn, Acquisition, Key KPIs, • Prepare NPS improvement action tracker Please note that deliverables like Advanced NPS profiling, Sentiment Analysis, multi-dimensional analysis are dependent upon the quality of data inputs provided by the CSP. Final deliverables, report format, content is flexible & will be agreed during solution design phase. ii. Customer Experience & PM/CM Tool:Ericsson is offering CEM Tool which deliver uniquely useful insights into customers’ service experience to help you make smarter decisions. They eliminate blind spots and equip you with the most valuable, rich, and real-time insights into the network, service, and subscriber lifecycles.Based on high-level requirements from the RFP requirement are split into 6 Elements:• Element 1: Collection of Counters, aggregation, data access and BI Environment• Element 2: Inventory, Configuration & Discovery• Element 3: Performance Assurance• Element 4: Service Quality Management• Element 5: Alarms, Correlation & Automation• Element 6: Monitoring Tools      a. Value Packages from CEM & PM/CM Tool: 1. OptiGo: Network performance Assurance Solution understands your Network and provides Powerful Monitoring Capabilities, Visualization and Intelligent Alerts through a Singular Integrated Platform leveraging Correlation for Intelligent Insights and Recommendations.2. Minerva: unveils an end-to-end network topology solution adept at dismantling inter-domain barriers within networks spanning multiple domains. By facilitating the visualization of cross-domain connectivity across both the physical infrastructure and service layers, Minerva fosters comprehensive network insight. 3. NOA: The NOA (Network Operations Automation) module pioneers a closed-loop automation paradigm, profoundly contributing to workflow management enhancement. By orchestrating automated responses to network events, NOA minimizes manual intervention and optimizes operational workflows.4. Fault Management: The Fault Management component establishes a centralized framework tailored for the meticulous administration of faults and alarms within intricate network environments. This system harmonizes fault handling, facilitating streamlined network troubleshooting.5. Zeus: Introduces a robust inventory management paradigm seamlessly intertwined with automated discovery processes and configuration management. This amalgamation streamlines network asset tracking and configuration control, bolstering operational effectiveness.6. Workflow Automation: A Centralized System for managing faults and alarms in complex networks.7. Olympus AI/ML: At the forefront of innovation, the Olympus AI/ML module boasts a cutting-edge anomaly detection feature. This advanced capability leverages artificial intelligence and machine learning techniques to identify aberrations within the network, enabling swift and proactive mitigation of potential issues. b. Right Sizing of the KPI: SCO does not impose the limitations as to maximum number of KQIs stored in the system, neither it limits their complexity. Actual formulas of the KQIs are specified during the analysis phase depending on the vendor documentation and/or specific preferences of Opco. Full list of the KQIs to be configured is the subject of the HLD document summarizing the analysis.  For reference, here we provide a sample of the KQIs based on Network MS Schedule 20.1.. .  CUSTOMER EXPERIENCE BASED ON CEM   1.1.. VoLTE Speech Quality Index VoLTE SQI or Equivalent Voice Quality Metric (CEM Based) 1.2.. Top 5 (by volume) App Performance App Performance Index (or equivalent) for Top 5 apps by volume (CEM Based) 1.3.. Top 5 (by number of subs) App Performance App Performance Index (or equivalent) for Top 5 apps by number of subscribers (CEM Based) 1.4.. Platinum Customer Experience Score Platinum Customer Experience Score Index (CEM Based) 1.5.. Gold Customer Experience Score Gold Customer Experience Score Index (CEM Based) 1.6.. Silver Customer Experience Score Silver Customer Experience Score Index (CEM Based) 1.7. .  Internal Latency Internal Latency (CEM Based) 1.8.. External Latency External Latency (CEM Based) 1.9.. E2E Latency E2E Latency (CEM Based) 1.10.. Internal Packet Loss Internal Packet Loss (CEM Based) 1.11.. External Packet Loss External Packet Loss (CEM Based) 1.12.. E2E Packet Loss E2E Packet Loss (CEM Based) 1.13.. Service Setup SR TCP Service Setup SR (CEM Based)                                                                           Table 9: CEM KPI             Overview Solution ArchitectSolution System consists of a Data Integration Engine, Data and Compute Cluster and an Application Server. The different components are Cloud native and microservice based that provide a high level of flexibility in terms of data integration and data ingestion as well as the build of enhanced uses cases around analytics and automation by combining different type of data coming from different sources. Also leveraging the Kubernetes and clustering it provides smooth and a high level of scalability either horizontally or vertically in a secure manner.The Data Integration Engine consists of the Data discovery and data collector module. Data across different sources are collected / integrated into the system using various collectors available within the System.It provides an umbrella management Service Assurance Solution and an E2E Network View along with monitoring across different domain with different levels of views (from executive level to deep technical view) from one trusted/centralized source of information.The proposed solution will collect PM and CM data from multiple data sources like Huawei, Nokia and Ericson EMS, NMS as well as other third-party systems.                        Figure 28 – Overview Solution ArchitectureData CollectionStructured and unstructured data of the network will be collected from different sources using appropriate interfaces/ protocols (sFTP, FTP, Telnet) located in different geographical location without affecting the performance of the source. KPIs and KQIs will be defined and monitored for all the in-scope network elements.                               Figure 29 – Data Collection Methodology        Figure 30 – Data Collection FrameworkNote that the scope of the solution in terms of configuration and implementation services is restricted to the collection of PM and CM data from Radio and Core OMC or other controller/custom shared environment on regular basis (15 min is the usual rate of transfer) and will be covering the systems mentioned in [33] and [34]. The needed data will be:• Pushed (by the OMC or other controller/mediation) at regular intervals, 15 minutes being the usual rate of transfer. The transfer protocols are sftp, ftp or KAFKA. • or pulled from a custom shared environment. The transfer protocols are SFTP/FTP/Kafka/RabbitMQ protocols.iii. Geo Location Tool:Ericsson is offering NITRO Location Intelligence solution, and the modules that will be delivered for fulfilling the required RFP scope. The proposed solution has the capability to deliver customer-centric coverage, performance, and usage data for the entire radio access network(s) with a 50m bin resolution. Addressing the key requirements for a subscriber centric solution like: • Geolocating subscribers based upon network events with better than cell level accuracy • Geolocating events over the entire network with better than cell level accuracy • Geolocating groups of mobile events such as drops, type of service, congestion & starting calls • Creating contextual maps of traffic/users/performance based upon user segmentation • Virtual Drive Test services • Geolocation based analysis using trace files.• Network Performance KPIs• VIP assurance• Handset analysis• Roamers Analysis• Cluster Optimization• Audit (Site Verification)The table below provides a summary of which modules/sub-modules mentioned in this document that are being proposed to cover Ooredoo requirements.      Module Sub Module Included or not included NITRO Location Intelligence Network Analysis Included Optimization Included Web Reporting Included VIP Included Coverage Included Dashboard Included Diagnostics Included Optimize (Cluster Optimization) Included Audit (Site Verification) Included       Table 10: Geo Functionality                  Solution Architecture:            The following shows an example high level architecture diagram for NITRO Location Intelligence.      Specific hardware and deployment requirements may vary for this Project based on Vendor.                                 Figure 31: High Level Architecture for NITRO Location Intelligence            Key Technical Highlights of the Tool:      Enables operators to extract value aligned with the operator’s investment for such visibility via an adaptable data model enabling:       • Subscriber-centric automation of cell site verification, reducing deployment time and OPEX while increasing overall quality of subscriber experience.• Subscriber-centric flexible and automated RF optimization of cell sites based on operator defined objectives saving OPEX and even CAPEX with energy savings use-cases.• Flexible sizing and deployment models enabling unique mobile network operator revenue expansion via such areas as automated service delivery and new vertical opportunities of Private LTE/5G, IoT, Edge, and more with a solution’s total cost of ownership aligned to the operator's use case• Evolve towards Automated Assurance with rapid issue identification and resolution in just a few clicks via NITRO LOCATION INTELLIGENCE guided automation workflows - solving issues with less manpower reducing OPEX• Integrate with 3rd party feeds to further advance enrichment of NITRO LOCATION INTELLIGENCE subscriber-centric network data and location intelligence via Open APIs to enable operator business units with business process systems.• Provide rich analytics, reports, and location intelligence feeds to enable operators with an array of additional revenue opportunities by leveraging their mobile data to support as example subscribers' mobility management (in the cities) or marketing campaigns.                 6) Delivering RFP Requirement:      a. Alert Management:Any deviation in the Interface or Resource utilization pattern will be notified to the user via email, SMS, Alert tones etc. Every KPI will have a threshold limit, Once the KPIs threshold is breached alerts will be sent out to the concern through SNMP traps or any other means agreed.         Figure 32: Setting of Threshold        b. RCA using topology:   Root Cause analysis can be done using OptiGo Trends module and Minerva Topology module. · If a particular node ‘s KPI degrades, then user can drilldown to the level of counters and failure counters to see which counter has caused that KPI to degrade. · User can further drilldown to the level of objects of that node and see what went wrong in any of the objects which may be another probable cause of that node ‘s KPI degradation.· User can further proceed with his/her analysis by redirecting himself from Trends module to Minerva Topology module to see if this KPI degradation is because of the other neighbor nodes which are connected to this affected network element.· User can view the affected nodes and their neighbors in the topology. This helps the user in identifying the root cause of the problem in the node A. PM overlay on top of the devices in topology helps the user in coming up with probable cause of the problem.                                  Figure 33: Sample Topology                  c. SOC SQI incident/problem management:OptiGo Service Quality Management assures digital QoS, enabling the proactive management of digital services in complex ecosystems. · The Solution monitors the collective efforts of the Service performances which determines the degree of satisfaction of the end user for the services obtained. OptiGo monitors the end-to-end services of the Customers. · Inventory based Service Quality Management enables to drill down from the Mobility/Enterprise Network View to the Resource Inventory associated with each of the Customers and their services.·  · Service Quality Management offers service quality modeling and monitoring capabilities through Service Modeling and Service Explorer modules. The Service Modeling module enables the user to create service models for Enterprise and Mobility services by aggregating KPIs and KQIs. · In Enterprise Service Explorer view, the Service tree and drill down is as shown below:· Customer --> Region --> Service --> KQI --> KPI --> Network Elements· In Mobility Service Explorer view, the Service tree and drill down is as shown below:· Region --> Service --> KQI --> KPI --> Network Elements                       Figure 34: Performance Drill Down       	                  d. NOC/SOC - Alarm correlation (Incident Classification):• The Alarm Correlation, Suppression and Incident Classification involves Machine Learning based Clustering Mechanism that allows to group most relevant Alarms that have occurred on the Neighbor and connected Devices thereby classifying them as Incidents. • This Intelligence is brought out by the End-to-End Topology which could identify the Inter-connected Neighbors present in the Network.• The Classified Incidents contains the Initiation Time, Total Count of Alarms present within the Incident, The Severity and the Status of the Incident identified.• This could further be drilled down to evaluate the Probable Root Cause for the Alarms that have been generated within the Incident, the Link that could potentially be down because of the Incident as well as the Services that would potentially be affected. • It shall further enable to predict the potential Alarms and Incidents that could occur on the connected Elements soon.                            Figure 35: Incident Classification                  e. Customer Network Experience:OptiGo’ s Network Analytics enables to analyze the Network Bandwidth Performance experienced by the Subscribers. An overview of the download speeds, upload speeds and latency can be measured across different regions.It enables to drill down and identify the Cell/Port/Object that is catering to the User Equipment.                                       Figure 36: Incident Classification                                Figure 37: Incident Classification            f. Dashboards and Trend analytics: Flexible Dashboarding and Reporting Framework allows the Users to generate on-the-fly Reports and schedule on demand. Drill-down to the counter level, KPI levels helps in faster troubleshooting.         Figure 38: Incident Classificationg. Optigo Report Builder: Creation of Customized dashboard as per user preferences.Report Builder is the feature of OptiGo which is used to create reports without any coding using simple and intuitive user interface. Using Report Builder any user can create, schedule, and download their reports. All the reports in the PMS system will be shown based on the granularity selected. NRT/Hourly/ Daily/Weekly/Monthly/Yearly and date range. Historical data can be seen as per the report selected.Default Reports- Default Reports are the reports that are inbuilt in the PMS. The reports will have certain KPIs that are associated with the different types of reports.Custom Reports-Custom Reports can be created by the user with KPIs of their choice. Both default and custom reports can be scheduled and exported as per the need of the user in the desired format.                                                    Figure 39: Report Builder Viewh. Formula builder: Customization of formula across multi-domain and vendor provides flexible KPI creation options.The OptiGo Performance Management (PM) solution comes equipped with a comprehensive suite of pre-defined KPIs, readily accessible "Out of the Box."However, the system's capabilities extend beyond the predefined KPIs. Users possess the freedom to create an unrestricted number of KPIs and Key Quality Indicators (KQIs), tailored to their specific requirements.At the heart of this flexibility lies the Formula Builder module, a potent tool that offers unparalleled latitude in crafting KPIs. This module allows users to harness the full spectrum of counters available within the application, going beyond default KPIs packaged with the solution.            	            Figure 40: KPI Creation Page     7) Use Case Definition Process/SOP:      Use case development is a continuous process for experience enhancement. Ericsson brings it’s learning from previous experiences & “Out of the box” will be deployed in initial stages. The requirement in RFP scope will be fulfilled along the 5 years journey.Use cases are followed intending in below steps:      • Data Modelling  Data Modelling is vital in ensuring that correct user experience is reported across all the agreed services. The SCO team will include S-KPI data modelling which includes the following terms: • System Service: This corresponds to a customer-facing service; it is what is consumed by the user. • S-KPIs: These are selected based on consumer expectations revealed by user studies. For example, the S-KPIs used to characterize the quality of experience of a mobile stream (i.e., YouTube) could cover the user perceptions of starting the service, keeping the service and the average quality of the service usage, as well as service interaction quality. • Quality of System Service (QoSS): This represents the combined quality level of all S-KPIs for a System Service, to provide a single measure that reflects a combination of several quality aspects. It is characterized by the following three aspects (abbreviated to A, R, I): • Accessibility: The probability a user can start a service • Retainability: The probability the service stays up once it is started • Integrity: The average quality perceived by the consumer during the calls/sessions, including interactions, and the service access and release times.  • Resource Service: This is a functional part of the realization structure, which when combined with several other Resource Services builds a system that can deliver a System Service. • SCO will focus heavily on measures within the Service layer, called Service KPIs (S-KPI). The S-KPI concept provides a top-down structure for quality measurements and is built on a structural relationship between system services and resource services and between S-KPIs and R-KPIs.  • R-KPIs are generated from various network sources including RAN, Core, Terminal agents and various other sources depending on the service. S/R KPI correlation helps us to drill down and identify which resource services are responsible for S-KPI degradation. Therefore, it is vital to establish what data sources are available to ensure appropriate S-KPIs can be calculated. Individual KPI/SKPI/KQI will be framed to be calculated & converted to QoE model.                             Figure 41: QoE Model             • Use cases categorize and group different aspects of customer interactions and relationships with a CSP with the intention of designing and implementing specific experience or retention strategies. Use cases reflect how the CSP would like to engage with their customers and allow the prioritization between different segments. • Designing use cases to specifically target areas of business priorities will provide insights to support Opco in areas such as: • Understanding problems that are impacting the experience and how they can be resolved. • Understanding the investment required to improve Quality of Service. • Decisions on designing more effective marketing campaigns by understanding the experience of important market segment. • Understanding the trends of subscribers that can lead to cross-selling/upselling of additional services. • Use cases must be specific and relevant to the local market conditions.  Each use case is structured across at least five dimensions namely Service, Subscriber Segment, Location, Time, and Device Type as shown in the figure below: Figure 42 - Use case parameters • Each use case has a set of performance measures attached to it to give insights into the experience subscribers are getting from the services they use. • To develop the Use case, The Data modeling parameters are adopted in ene-2-end service improvement approach.  Figure 43 - End-2-end service troubleshooting                                                                                                                      • Each service may further include analytical scenarios/use cases. The exact specification of each use case will need to be agreed with Ooredoo in line with the business objectives and market conditions. The specification or use case will define customer segment, location/geography, and device type (e.g., smartphones, tablets) etc. to analyze the customer experience.      • Use case development process: • Agree 3-month collection of baseline values for S-KPIs and process for development of targets and improvement profile • Identify benefit case areas and agree on measurement method • Development of benefits case template with agreed areas and measurements 8) Use Cases: Success story of Customer experience journey will be measured with Use cases deployed.Measuring the capability deployed is important to drive the continuous improvement & use cases model.Ericsson is using below standard measures to quantify the value gain arrived from the different segment of organization.Figure 44 – Capability Measurement Model- Subscriber Churn Correlation & Multi-Dimension Trouble shooting:Securing users intend to churn with 360 multi-dimensional insight view from NPS module to drive NPS & Experience improvement.Key module/section included are:- Coverage vs NPS Detractors (Geo Location Plots)- NPS Detractor Call-Back Study- Poor Coverage vs Quality Areas- Customer complaint vs Detractors- Customer Experience Analytics Tool (Providing key KPI impacting experience)- Port-Out vs Detractors- NPS Advanced Profiling (Customer Segments)- Detractors Movement (Rural vs Urban)        Figure 45 – 360 Multi Dimension NPS ImprovementRef# Malaysia/Thailand Tier-1 Operator- Top Application Dynamic Movement & Experience Track:Ensuring Networks Top Application are maintained in good experience zone. Any changes in top application & associated outlier KPI’s will be picked for immediate improvement actions.        Figure 46 – 360 Multi Dimension NPS Improvement       Ref# Ooredoo Qatar during World Cup/Myanmar-Asian Tier-1 Opcos	- Inbound Roaming Subscriber Analysis:Ensuring inbound subscriber experience latched to home operator network. Interactive dashboard to identify immediately the impact & drill down to specific Roaming partner to act quickly for improvement actions.               Figure 47 – Inbound Roaming Improvement       Ref# Ooredoo Qatar during World Cup/Myanmar-Asian Tier-1 Opcos9) AI Ops Use Cases:         The AI / ML Analytics product provides the following features:• Traffic Pattern analysis• Anomaly detection• Predictive Analysis (Capacity Forecasting)• NPS Prediction• Churn Prediction• Sentiment Analysisa) NPS Predictions:Defining model to predict the KPI impacting NPS & clusters proactively to act on required resource or service KPI degradation.                                  Figure 48 – NPS Prediction Model              Ref# Malaysia/ Thailand- Tier-1 Opcosb) Complaint & Cx Per $ Improvement:Linking NPS vs Customer complaint to predict the detractor/Churn zone & act to fix the issue proactively to avoid churn & traffic loss.                               Figure 49 – Cx Per $ & Complaint Improvement       Ref# Malaysia/ Thailand- Tier-1 Opcos       c) Subscriber Sentiment analysis:Linking NPS vs Customer complaint to predict the detractor/Churn zone & act to fix the issue proactively to avoid churn & traffic loss.                                Figure 50 – Subscriber Sentiment Analysis                         Ref# Malaysia/ Thailand- Tier-1 Opcos10) Integration with 3rd Party System:          Sunrise Solutions support most of the commonly used Interfaces to integrate with 3rd party systems like Umbrella FM or Service Management / Trouble ticketing system, it can be through:• REST API – HTTPS; Web Services; JDBC; SFTP (Flat File Formats such as CSV, XML, XLS, etc.); CORBA; TL1; SSH; SOAP; RabbitMQ; WSDL; Agent Client Collector; Custom APIs; Cisco, Microsoft Azure, Google Cloud and AWS APIs.11) Proposed Scope for Probing Solution:     The proposed probing solution includes the following: 4G/5G control plane traffic capture using cProbes 4G/5G user plane traffic sampling @15% of the traffic is captured. Real-time Advanced troubleshooting for 4G, 5G and IMS technologies including –• CP-UP CDR and events• E2E ladder diagram• Detailed protocol decoding 12) SCO Journey:     Ericsson will propose below steps of SCO transformation journey starting from Establishment, Consolidation and Enhancement.   By the end of the journey the SCO will have capabilities of: • Unified Service Monitoring o E2E cross domain, vendor agnostic KQIs defined on complete set of underlying vendor dependent metrics o Automated closed loop service quality management o AI/ML forecasting & preventive maintenance • Service Catalogue and Inventory Management o Service templates enabling fast service instantiation in Service Inventory o Inventory Management • Service Root Cause analysis o Complete set of correlation.o AI/ML event correlation • Topology and Service Mapping o Automated discovery and reconciliation  o Versatile service and network topology visualization perspectives w. drill down • External Fulfilment o Completing all required report templates  o Completing integration of all necessary report source data 
B. Joined-Up operating ModelThis section describes the operational platform and tools which will be deployed by Ericsson for the Managed Services Operations along with description on the field services and 3PP management. (i) MS Delivery Platform ArchitectureTo support the processes and the wider delivery, the Operations Engine comes with a full tools suite: the Ericsson Managed Service Delivery Platform (MSDP). MSDP aligns to the ITIL recommendations and the eTOM framework.        Figure 51 – MSDP Functional ViewThe Ericsson MSDP tool suit consists of the following elements.- A Connection factory: a reusable enterprise library and API service which provides a secure single point of connectivity between Ooredoo’s Network and Tools, and the Ericsson MSDP- An Enterprise Service Bus: a plug & play secure messaging bus providing communication services between all the MSDP tools and elements- A Data Lake: a secure repository of data making sure all data is always available to all tools and applications of the Ericsson Operations Engine- Ericsson uses big data & support Google File System (GFS) instead of Hadoop File system (HDFS)-The Big data will provide UI for visualization & data export from specific tools.- All connection is done via connection factory which support standard API. Connection Factory Support XML data & transform to CSV file.- We are sharing Metadata within tool, not across tool deployed on Data Lake.- We are not storing any data in memory, handling as big data in GCP. - Regarding Big query there is no architecture, from cloud storage (PMGCP) prospective it's maintained- Automation: platforms and capability to automate end-to-end processes e.g., robotic process automation, driving efficiency and minimizing human efforts.- OneFM Fault Manager: a centralized real-time system supporting the fault management processes. OneFM is an umbrella system, to which Element Managers of all vendors send their alarms and events.- ITSM: an advanced ticketing tool mainly to handle and mange Incident, Problem and Change tickets.- A workforce management (WFM) system: a field operation support system providing scheduling functionality to improve the efficiency of the field force.- Ericsson Adaptive Inventory (EAI): a comprehensive inventory management solution to manage network and services assets.- Design and Optimization Platform (DOP): supporting the intelligent optimization capabilities of the Operation Engine. DOP is organized in different areas related to network design and optimization activities: Planning, Design, Tuning, Audit, Diagnostics and Optimization.- Managed Services Analytics Platform (MSAP): provides the operations with advanced capabilities to support data mining and develop and validate predictive models.- A Business Process Management System (BPMS): a system used to digitize and orchestrate all the Operation Engine processes. Creating end-to-end service flows, supported by analytics to continuously analyze and optimize based on hard facts from real data.- Insite: a key component in the Operations Engine; a Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence Platform. InSite takes cross-domain, cross technology, internal network & external data and applies machine learning and artificial intelligence to provide insights not previously available, then feeds the other MSDP automation platform components or processes that can perform remediation actions without human intervention.The Ericsson Operation Engine follows a data driven approach and data is considered a key asset. By applying advanced data analysis enabled through machine learning and artificial intelligence the Operation Engine will be able to predict events, incidents, network, and service degradation, and consequently prevent these incidents and degradation from happening and doing any harm.To manage and protect data, a Data Authority is introduced caring for:- Data management i.e., handle ingestion and preparation of data, and ensure usability, accessibility, reliability, and timely availability of data for users.- Analytics and model development i.e., create insight and enhance decision making, and develop and maintain AI models, algorithms, automation rules and supporting use-cases, business rules and policy scripts.]- Knowledge management i.e., aid continuous improvement and innovation by sharing, using, and managing knowledge, related to AI and automation covering data, models, algorithms and use-cases.- Ericsson AI-ML suite manages its Version Management System (VMS), also called Configuration Management System (CMS) or Version Control System (VCS) supporting the AI CIs in development environment. It’s replicated on production with proper testing results & in case of any abnormality this gets roll back to previous version.The change replication is manual & AI CIs are done in development environment. The interface between the Asset & Configuration Management system (CMS) and the Change Management system are connected in testing environment & post validation & trained model is replicated in production.All such Configuration Management strategy to manage the existing AI CIs from Ops to Dev are made in development environment manually.- Data governance and control i.e., set the strategy for data quality, usability, availability, security, privacy, and consistency, determine the policies, directives, instructions, and standards related to these topics, and ensure these policies, directives, instructions, and standards are applied.Furthermore, Ericsson requires the flexibility to use its own or third-party cloud-based tools and storage infrastructure and transferring data therein and requires the flexibility to use and process data which includes data use rights and customer consent, and personal data processing in accordance with applicable regulatory compliance.The Tool, Automation and AI/ML environment is a key component of the Ericsson Operations Engine. It supports the processes and the organization in achieving their objectives, it empowers and enables staff in the performing of their function and tasks.Ericsson Tools are part of EOE Components. Ericsson Tools conform to ITIL Recommendations and to eTOM Framework.Ericsson Tools Portfolio contains tools for several Functional Areas such as:• Resource Management and Assurance.• Service Management and Assurance.• Customer Experience Management.• Inventory Management.• Business Intelligence and Analytics.• Presentation and reporting.• Network Design and Optimization• Automation.ToolsThe tools environment is a key component of the Ericsson Operations Engine, and it enables the delivery of capabilities and business outcomes. It connects the Ericsson operations team with OOREDOO ’s Network. It facilitates standardized ways of working and high level of efficiency in our operations. A high-level architecture of the Ericsson Tools Suite is as shown below.Figure 52 - MSDP Tool suiteHigh Level Solution DesignThe proposed MSDP solution will be able to manage multivendor nodes and technologies existing in Ooredoo’s network.Diagram below presents MSDP Tools which will be used to support MS scope -Figure 53 - MSDP SolutionTools Solution - ComponentsThe functionality of Ericsson MSDP Solution components presented in the diagram above is described below -Tool NameFunctionalityDescriptionOneFMFault ManagementOneFM is a centralized system which supports Fault Management processes (as defined by eTOM) or Event Management process (as defined by ITIL/MSTOP).ITSMTicketing ToolITSM is a ticketing tool used within MSDP. It handles Incident Request, Problem Request, Change Request, Task Requests, Work Orders.WFM IFSField Ops ToolsWFM IFS is the next generation tool for the field operation which provides intelligent scheduling functionality to improve the efficiency of the field force.It is based on customized IFS (Industrial, Finance and Services) vendor tool and it is accessible by Authorized Service Provider (ASP), ARP (Authorized Resource Provider) and internal Ericsson users.EAIInventoryEricsson Adaptive Inventory (EAI) is a comprehensive Service Resource Management (SRM) platform that stores and customizes all the physical and logical resources a Communications Service Provider (CSP) needs to manage its network and services.EAI is integrated and is used to enhance all other MSDP tools.BIReporting, VisualizationThe Business Intelligence and Analytics solution supports reporting, visualization and analysis of Operational Efficiency and Contract Fulfilment for customers integrated in MSDP.TableauVisualization, DashboardsNext Generation Visualization tool to provide information to both operations and the businessMATEMSDP Automation EngineMATE is e2e automation solution with drag and drop interface, offered as part of MSDP suite.ENABLEMSDP Automation EngineENABLE is an automation platform that is designed to handle incident resolution and event management in any operation center.RPAMSDP Automation EngineRobotic Process Automation (RPA) is the automation of back and front office processes that are largely rules-based, structured, and repetitive.Data lakeData lakeGoogle Cloud Platform based, supporting ingestion, processing, and storing of operational and various network data. Incorporates number of functionalities including data storage, performance management, data analytics and reporting and visualization.Connection FactoryData connectors, AdaptersConnection Factory is a solution to provide an enterprise library of data connectors and adapters for all vendors and technologyInsiteAI/MLInSite is an implementation of Intelligent Network Operations, including both telecom and IT networks. Performance Management ToolPerformancePM solution is a comprehensive network performance management solution supporting quality assurance, performance monitoring, governance and enabling AI-ML use cases and correlations.Umbrella CM SystemNetwork Configuration Management• Configuration Summary • Device Configuration Management • Maintain the Current and Previous Network Configurations • Real Time Configuration Change Tracking • Configuration Versioning and Comparison (Configuration Drift) IT SolutionConnectivityConsists of connectivity solution and components which provide for Users and MSDP tools access to customer Network data, customer applications and to MSDP Tools.IntegrationB2B IntegrationB2B integration will be done between Ericsson ITSM tool and Ooredoo Customer Care tool so that bi-directional TT data may be exchanged while receiving any trouble ticket from Customer CareMITOMonitoring tools for IN and NFVI nodesE2E IT Service Management & Automation Tools StackSPMSSpare PartsSparts Part Management System to be used by Field Team.NPSNet Promoter Score™Solution with advance capability of AI/ML to proactively secure better CSAT & corelate services experience for reducing churnTable 11: Tool Solution ComponentTools Solution - InterfacesA brief description of Ericsson MSDP Solution interfaces presented in the diagram above is as follows -ID Interface from Interface to Interface Description INT_1 Ooredoo Network OneFM Ooredoo network EMS’s and Nodes are connected to OneFM via different probes for network Faults. Interface Type: SNMP, CORBA, other INT_2 Ericsson OneFM Ericsson ITSM This interface is a bi-directional interface. This is used for raising Auto/Semi-Auto Trouble Tickets from OneFM in ITSM. Also, status of Tickets can be transferred back to OneFM parent alarm as Alarm Updates INT_3 Ericsson ITSM Ericsson WFM-IFS This interface is a bi-directional interface. This is used for raising Work Orders from ITSM in WFM-IFS. Also, status can be transferred back and updated in ITSM. INT_4 Ooredoo Network Ericsson EAI This is an interface used to fetch Inventory data from Ooredoo network EMS’s and Nodes by NIM Parser and upload to Ericsson NIM/EAI. Assurance required information will be pulled by Ericsson EAI periodically. Interface Type: File Based INT_5 Ericsson EAI Ericsson OneFM Inventory Information (Physical/Logical/Service) is made available to Fault Management system. This Inventory will be used by OneFM to do Enrichment, Topology Based Correlation, Cross Domain Correlation, and Service Correlation. This is a Uni- Directional interface INT_6Ericsson EAI EricssonITSM Inventory Information is made available to ITSM for Ticket Enrichments. This is a Uni-Directional interface INT_7Ericsson EAI Ericsson WFM-IFS Inventory Information is made available to WFM-IFS for Work Orders. This is a Uni-Directional interface INT_8Ooredoo Network Connection Factory This is an interface used to fetch Performance data from Ooredoo network EMS’s and Nodes, Data will be used by PMGCM and Insite tools. Interface Type: File basedINT_9 EricssonOneFMITSMNIM/EAIWFM-IFSData Lake / BIAll the systems mentioned data will be made available to Ericsson Reporting solution which has a Data Lake. On top of the Data Lake solution, Reports will be generated which can be viewed/scheduled to be seen. This is a Uni-Directional Interface.INT_10MATE/ENABLEEricsson OneFMMATE is integrated with OneFM and ITSM via ESB to create Incidents/ CR.INT_11MATE/ENABLEEricsson ITSMMATE is integrated with OneFM and ITSM via ESB to create Incidents/ CR.INT_12MATE/ENABLEOoredoo NetworkMATE could access customer EMSs to collect more information for Automation purposes.Ooredoo Network (infra-alarms)MITOMITO will collect infra alarms from customer network Table 12: Tool Solution InterfacesTools architecture and data structureEricsson proposes a cloud-based tools solution which will be common across all three Opcos. The key tools which will be deployed include fault management (OneFM), ticketing tool (ITSM), Field Operations tool (WFM IFS), inventory management (EAI), reporting (BI), visualization (NGRVA), automation engine (Mate, Enable, RPA) etc. The Ericsson Managed Services Data Lake and Data Pipeline Solution is envisioned to be a comprehensive enablement platform for providing the capabilities to meet the next-generation data challenges for enterprise digital transformation, in a cost effective and agile manner. Data lake platform shall support to design, build, and maintain capabilities that will provide for the ingestion, storage, processing of all internal and external data required by internal members, as well as capabilities for analytical and machine learning applications.MSDP Tools data will reside in the Data Lake. The data available in Data Lake will include alarm, configuration, performance, tickets, work orders and inetwork inventory data from the MSDP tools - OneFM, ITSM, WFM-IFS etc.  Figure 54 – Data Lake SolutionTools Solution – IT/ ConnectivityFor the network connectivity new links will be established between Ericsson and Ooredoo.• Primary link: VPN over Internet • Backup link: VPN over InternetAutomation & AI/ML Use Cases Automation platforms like MATE, ENABLE, RPA, INSITE(AI/ML) enables any mobile network to be intelligently automated. Based on open interfaces, it’s able to take on the challenge of a multi-vendor and multi-technology network environment. Automation Platform will help communication service providers’ (CSPs) optimize their network performance, increase operational efficiency, and deliver enhanced customer experience. Ericsson wants to provide our customers with an open platform that enables smarter networks. As networks become more complex, the platform takes automation forward by supporting diverse vendors and multiple radio access network technologiesBelow figure covers some of the key use cases Ericsson proposes to deploy in Ooredoo network during the transformation phase. A more detailed list of use cases will be finalized at the time of transformation by the Ericsson Transformation Office in consultation with Ooredoo: -• Alarm reduction & Correlation • Auto healing (Zero touch: auto diagnosis & Recovery)• Auto Trouble ticket & WO creation• Auto Health Checks, audits, Log collection• Outage dashboardFigure 55 - Automation use casesPlease refer to the ‘Efficiency KPI’ worksheet in the ‘RFP_Round_5_Instructions_Ericsson Response’ excel file submitted along with this document for more details on the proposed use cases, required information to train the model, algorithm used, use case limitations and model accuracy.(ii) 3PP FLM Management and Data Center OperationsFSP Contract Management model - Ericsson acts as operational interface towards the FSPs; manages supplier on behalf of Ooredoo whereas Ooredoo retains contractual ownershipKey benefits for Ooredoo include but are not limited to: • Economical (avoiding adding margin on Subcon/FSP costs)• Delivery capabilities by specialized suppliers i.e., Skills, tools, performance, contractual agreement etc.• Ericsson global tools utilization for increased efficiency, productivity and through automation & AI.• Ericsson shall help to rationalize & synergize the FSP contract portfolio.• All suppliers would be integrated to Ericsson, ensuring an E2E view & governance on Incident Management, Fault Management, Problem management, TT handling, WO dispatch & completion, SLA performance etc.	OrganizationField Organization would have resources with different expertise, structured to have efficient and close control over the FSP -• FOPS Head• FSP Contract Manager• Safety Manager• Spare Parts Manager• Performance Management• SME Telecom• SME Power• SME B2B & B2C• RiggerFSP Contract Management Solution DescriptionEricsson will work as one interface for all field operational issues by managing FSP vendors in scope as per their contracts with OoredooEricsson will act as first interface towards Ooredoo FSPs or suppliers by managing the service contracts which Ooredoo and FSP have established. Under the obligations of such contracts Ericsson will perform activities like request management, WLA & SLA management, process management, quality policy definition and control for FSP suppliers.Figure 56 - FSP Management ModelEricsson shall be responsible for following activities for all existing FSP contracts in Ooredoo field network for its operations:• Act as central management body, on behalf of Ooredoo, to the extent necessary to perform management obligations in relation to a FSP Agreements• Perform the management responsibilities over FSP agreements set out with respect to the applicable Services in Scope of Work• Review performance under the FSP Agreements against service levels in the relevant FSP Agreements and conduct frequent performance review meetings to discuss performance under their FSP Agreements.• Generate periodic performance report of all FSP against the contractual SLA and share it with Ooredoo.• Document and notify Ooredoo of all problems/issues with FSP Agreements.• Provide technical and other input when the FSP Agreements are being considered for renewal or in the event of a new tender in relation to that FSP Agreements.• Liaise, co-operate, and work closely and interactively with Ooredoo ’s other Service Suppliers, who manage and maintain different platforms and carry out maintenance and support activities on the Ooredoo network.• Establish a process for the management of partners, suppliers, vendors and FSPs.• Ericsson shall maintain the EHS standards with the FSP’s on behalf of the Ooredoo• Always act in Ooredoo 's best interests.Activity flow shall be as follow:		                                  Figure 57 – Activity FlowEricsson will follow governance processes that guarantee not only full alignment with Ooredoo objectives, but also allows for mechanisms of maintaining flexibility and change control over the period of the Managed Services.The existing Working Level Agreements (WLA) between Ooredoo and FSP shall be reviewed with reference to Service Level Agreements (SLAs) required for managed services. The objective of governance shall be to streamline and maintain the WLA performance from all third parties to support SLA fulfilment.This will be achieved through the mechanism of regular governance meetings at different organization levels throughout the period of contracted services. The agenda of the meeting shall cover below suggested items:• Previous Meeting Minutes (MoM) & Action Points review • Operational delivery performance (WLA overall fulfillment) • Performance top issues identification and mitigation • Risk management- Plan to mitigate the risks • Activities forecast / New projectsThe Meeting should always precede the SLA fulfillment meeting so that the information collected during this meeting can be used to review the SLA fulfilment.Ericsson will be evaluating the performance of each service partner and rating them as per their service deliveries to support managed services for Ooredoo. Ooredoo at its choice may introduce any FSP vendor into the network ecosystem. Ericsson shall manage the new FSP agreement under its managed services if the services from the new FSP vendor are directly related to contracted service level agreements between Ooredoo and Ericsson.Ericsson and Ooredoo shall be discussing and agreeing on inclusion of new FSP vendor services and mechanism to manage it through defined working level agreements (WLA) between Ericsson and new FSP vendor. Such a decision shall be taken during periodic governance meetings.Ericsson managed services model supports in managing the FSP contracts decided at time of transition in. The model is flexible to incorporate additional FSP contracts under the purview of managed services, however it shall exclude the third party delivering a new set of services, technology or feature which will require a different set of vendor management, or when the new services are altogether beyond the contracted managed services.	Operations and Maintenance of Core SitesThis section outlines the Scope of service functions & activities which Managed Services from Ericsson will provide to OOREDOO on agreed bill of quantity for Core Sites Passive Infrastructure. It also provides insights to deliverables in terms of technical aspects, service functions and SLAs Ericsson will provide to Ooredoo with this offering.Core Sites facilities being extremely sensitive to downtimes and each downtime causes significantly large number of losses. Highest availability, resilience and fault tolerance are vital for the Core Sites to facilitate uninterrupted network operations.Operations and Maintenance of Core Sites Solution DeliverablesEricsson shall perform operations and maintenance of core sites as per agreed scope of work and the in-scope nodes / equipment. Ericsson resources should carry out all preventive, corrective and scheduled maintenance as well as administrative services related to the Core SitesThe scope of a Core site shall be1. Power2. Cooling3. Fire suppression systems4. Common infrastructure5. Physical Access6. non-OEM cabling, ducting, and racking7. Hot and Cold aisle management8. Core site infrastructure9. Core site neatness and upkeep10. All other passive equipment (other than those in RAN, MW and access TX)Corrective MaintenanceEricsson shall perform corrective actions, initiated by the NOC, to resolve faults and restore network services within an agreed timescale.Corrective maintenance is a maintenance task performed to identify, isolate, and rectify an Incident so that the failed equipment, machine, or system can be restored to normal operational conditions or functions including, the required replacement of units, boards, components.Ericsson shall maintain for network 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, 365 days a yearMaintenance staff will carry out Corrective Maintenance activities for all network elements and associated auxiliary equipment at core sites under the scope and SLA of this service agreement.Alarms from the network are monitored in the Ericsson NOC and Corrective Maintenance with action initiated when a fault occurs. Technicians in the NOC determine the cause of the fault and, if possible, take corrective action remotely from the NOC. However, if this is not possible, then Corrective Maintenance actions and timing can then be decided depending on the effect of the fault on network quality of service, and an “Work Order” will be issued to send a Field Operation technician to site to clear the fault. Progress of fault clearance will be monitored, updated and data collected can be used for fault analysis and performance improvement.Field Operations will ensure that any fault is repaired in the most efficient manner according to the agreed priority and time requirements.Corrective maintenance scope shall include replacement of malfunctioning elements with spare parts, associated with their auxiliary parts.Preventive MaintenancePreventive Maintenance for the Core network sites comprises a program of activities, performed periodically. This includes checks, abnormality corrections, adjustments, tests, measurements, cleaning, as well as the analysis and replacement/repair of units, boards, modules, and electromechanical equipment of Core sitesThe objective of Preventative Maintenance to keep the equipment operating in a stable and normal status, preventing deficiencies and degradations, thus enable the reduction of failures and corrective maintenance interventions.ERICSSON shall provide periodical Preventive maintenance reports.The full list of all preventive maintenance activities will be agreed in the service contract.Preventive maintenance comprises periodically performed activities, such as abnormality corrections, back-ups, adjustments, and clean-ups in accordance with the following:• The main goal of performing PM is to maintain Ooredoo Core sites and assets quality and proactively minimize the number of service interruptions.• ensure that no service interruptions occurred during the preventive maintenance cycle.• ensure that all the preventive actions that require downtime are done only through the change management processes.• All system faults detected during preventive maintenance shall be fixed as long as the fault rectification does not require a service interruption; otherwise, the fault rectification should be conducted via the standard change management process/planned maintenance• Any deficiencies detected during execution of the maintenance plans shall be reported by the Ericsson using the trouble ticketing system.• The status of the preventive maintenance shall be regularly reported as per process KPIs.• Immediately report problems identified during the Preventive maintenance visits, including but not limited to faults, failures, breakages, vandalism, theft according to the system applicable to the relevant process.• In the event of vandalism being identified on arrival, the findings shall be immediately reported to OOREDOO.Ericsson shall follow disposal processes with the replaced consumables and/or spare parts.Preventive Maintenance of below systems shall be carried out as per agreed plan:• All core nodes / equipment installed on core sites• AC and DC Power systems including Generators• Batteries, Rectifiers and UPS• Air-conditioners (including CRAC and TRANE units)• BSM Controllers• Voltage boards and distribution panels• Fire suppression systems• CCTV systems• Intrusion detection systems• Lighting• Fuel and water pumps• Fuel and water tanks• Doors and access mechanisms (including emergency exits)• Glazing, DC tiling• Parking AreasPlanned MaintenancePlanned maintenance service shall l allow faults to be repaired that have been identified from routine checks and that are not directly service affecting. By planning these activities, a minimal impact on the network is achieved as well as a cost-efficient use of field resourcesAdministrative Services• Manage 24/7 sites access as per agreed process.• Onsite liaison with system owners, OEM or project stakeholders.• Control and manage the distribution of keys to service personnel and authorized 3rd parties• Ensure physical environment is managed• Cordon-off sites in case of safety risks• Maintain a list of authorized personnel requiring site accessSites Access and Security Management• Core sites Physical security Management• 24x7x365 basis call center/control room facility for recording, sharing and logging of Site Access• Electronic Keys Management• Investigate RCA for the theft cases and support Ooredoo with all the required details• Physical visits and verification of assets• Credentials verification of field techniciansSpare Parts managementSpare parts management is one of the core deliverables of Core sites maintenance. It includes transporting, logistics and management of spare parts and Consumables for core equipment.Ericsson shall use existing Ooredoo warehouse / room for housing spares and consumables at Core sites.It is assumed that:• Spare parts – be it telecom or non-telecom equipment shall be supplied / provided by Ooredoo, and Ericsson shall manage the repair & return process in line with L3 contract between Ooredoo and the respective vendors• Consumables shall be provided by Ooredoo and will be maintained by EricssonThird party managementEricsson shall be responsible for managing Ooredoo third party’s contracts in line with SLAs and performance of their contract with Ooredoo.Ericsson will control on-site activities performed by Third Party providers on core sites. This includes the control of physical site access by Third Parties, ensuring that Third Party providers fully comply with all Ooredoo's related procedures and policiesEricsson shall be responsible for any site visits required to control on-site activities performed by Ooredoo Third Party providers as defined above.Ericsson team should control Third party Providers during the execution of on-site corrective activities to avoid accidental damages to other network equipment installed at the same location. Ericsson will act as coordinator between Third Party service provider and the other departments of Ooredoo.Technical AcceptanceEricsson shall support in Technical Acceptance of new elements introduced into existing Ooredoo network based on the standards included in the System Vendor’s guidelines. Ericson shall complete and duly sign an acceptance document in two copies on site at the end of the acceptance process and procedure. In regular reporting frequency, it shall inform Ooredoo of such acceptance. From that moment, Ericsson will be responsible for the site maintenance. Main Responsibilities includes:1. End-to-End Site/Element Technical Acceptance for Operations and adding the new system/node in managed objects2. Commercial acceptance of the new system/node will be done by Ooredoo based on technical acceptance from Ericsson with mutually agreed standard acceptance document.3. Ensure that appropriate labelling, arrangement and implementation of cables and connectors as per Vendor specifications or Ooredoo instruction.4. Liaise with the vendor, project team and other 3rd party to ensure that the introduced network elements conform to acceptance standards5. Take over the responsibility of the new managed object or any other NE under the scope.6. Update the network inventory system of Ooredoo based on the procedures jointly defined and agreed with Ooredoo.7. Monitoring the progress of third-party activities in accordance of the Scope of Third Party Management will be Ericsson responsibility8. Ericsson shall propose acceptance tests and test criteria for Ooredoo approval, and Ericsson shall not be responsible for design defects.Detailed Ericsson MS (MSP) duties    Preventive Maintenance of Technical BuildingMSP will be performing detailed maintenance of technical building as per statement of compliance schedule 24. MSP will be performing Daily, Weekly, Monthly and Yearly maintenance tasks for the DC equipment.Preventive Maintenance on PowerUninterruptable Power Supply (UPS)Below are the key tasks for UPS maintenance. Statement of compliance document can be referred to for the complete list of tasks.UPS Weekly Maintenance Task• Check and report any abnormal noise / vibration• Check visible damage and aging condition• Check signs of overheating• Check general cleanliness and wipe clean the panel surface if necessary• Check and record voltage readings on system and module cabinets • Ensure all fans are operating for system supplying power to the critical load• Visual inspection of batteries for cracks, leaks or corrosion• Check operation of battery room ventilation systems• Check electrolyte level in all batteries, refill as needed UPS Monthly Maintenance Task• Visual inspection of the system and batteries• Check of changes in audible noise • Check for continuous exit airflow from the extractor fans and ventilation• Measure and record the battery charge voltage/current.• Measure and record the UPS input/output voltage/current at all the three phases.• Check all printed circuit boards and the Operator Control Panel - regulate if necessary. • Check Test Points - regulate if necessary.• Check all LED indications ensuring that are normal and no warning or alarm messages are present on the display panel.• Check UPS normal operation by shutting down input power UPS Yearly Maintenance Task• Check input/output cabling and their connectors.• Check the proper operation of the switches.• Check By-pass operation• Fully discharge battery, Measure and record the UPS autonomy• UPS cleaning• Calibrate all alarm levels• Calibrate all panel meters• Check the condition of all the DC and AC capacitor• Carry out discharge test on battery at an interval of 1 minuteRectifier SystemsBelow are the key Rectifier Maintenance Tasks:• Check all electrical and mechanical connections for tightness including control cables.• Check the condition of fuses and fuse holders and clean or replace as required.• Check the condition of all wire and cable terminals and correct as required. • Vacuum all loose debris.• Wipe down the exterior surface of the cabinet(s)• Inspect the exterior of the cabinet for integrity.• Clean the external cabinet.• Wipe down the interior components using a vacuum and a soft brush.• Clean ventilation openings.• Clean the air inlet and outlets.• Clean the cooling fans.• Use a stiff brush to remove the deposits embedded within the cooling fins of the heat sink.• Clean electronic controls using a soft brush and canned air to gently clean debris from surfaces.GeneratorsBelow are the key systems which will be part of the generator maintenance:• Lubricant System• Fuel Supply System• Air Supply System• Water Coolant System• Automatic Start Up System• Electrical System• OthersKey Generator Maintenance TasksBelow are the key tasks for Generators Maintenance• Visual inspection of the system for leakage (e.g. pumps, piping, contacts, fuel supply, refrigerator, oil circuit, etc)• Check for unobstructed ventilation• Check lubricant level and quality and fill if necessary.• Check for possible lubricant leakages• Check antifreeze level and density and fill if necessary.• Check water and lubricant radiator and clean fins if necessary• Check pre-heater normal operation and antifreeze temperature• Check fuel pumps (main and auxiliary) normal operation• Check fuel pipes for possible leakages• Measure and record available fuel quantity in tanks• Check the fuel radiator and clean fins if necessary.• Check fuel filters for possible leakages.• Check exhaust’s system connections• Check air filters and clean or replace if necessary• Check battery electrolyte level and density, also check battery voltage.• Check battery cable connections• Check battery charge voltage. Adjust if necessary.• Check motor belts and replace if necessary• Check the proper operation of light indicators and signal alarms.• Check all printed circuit boards and the Operator Control PanelPreventive Maintenance of HVAC – AIR CONDITIONERS / CHILLERS / CRAC MAINTENANCEBelow will be high level tasks in preventive maintenance of HVAC – AIR CONDITIONERS / CHILLERS / CRAC MAINTENANCE:• Inspection of air conditioning & cooling systems and any other supporting infrastructure • Inspection & maintenance of cooling systems (split and TRANE / YORK, STULZ and/or any other brand A/C installed at all Technical Buildings sites.)Preventive Maintenance of FIRE ALARM, CONTROL SYSTEMS and SPRINKLER SYSTEMS• Fire DETECTION ADDRESSABLE• Portable Fire Extinguishers• CO2/Fire Suppressor Auto Extinguishing• Electronics for Auto Extinguishing• Water Sprinkler Auto Extinguishing• Water Softeners and Acid Detection SystemGSM CommunicatorsBelow is the list of Yearly Maintenance of GSM Communicators• Check the GSM communicator for any fault or alarm appears.• Clean the GSM communicator and the sensors from dust or humidity.• Check the power supply and fuses.• Check the route of the sensors’ cables and repair it if necessary• Simulate the defined alarms within the GSM communicators and check the functionality and accuracy of the system.• Check for the latest software version for the GSM communicator and install it within the unit.• Check the overall physical installation and fix for any defects.Pest ControlAnnual Pest Control, Rodent Control, Snake Control, Fumigation, and Termite Treatment by placing solutions such as chemicals and repellents in areas deemed necessary.Execution of Corrective Maintenance Tasks of Technical Building The corrective maintenance of Tasks of Technical Building will be based on Incident prioritization and severity.• Incident prioritization• High Priority Incident • Medium Priority Incident • Low Priority IncidentAccess Control Management RequirementFollowing tasks will be performed as part of Access Control Management of Technical Buildings:• Formulate and administer a guideline covering all (authorized, unauthorized, temporary, emergency, etc.) personnel that have access to the various rooms. Traffic in and out must be logged automatically. • Responsible to manage and register all day-to-day activities & problem covered under Technical Building• Dedicated 24x7 real-time monitoring of video surveillance systems (inside and outside the premises) including monitoring of areas beyond the surveillance coverage within Technical Building.• Dimensioning of data storage capacity and backups (sizing to be agreed with Ooredoo).• Maintaining all data center schematic covering interior and exterior part of the Technical Buildings including expansions.• Implement 24x7 Security policy within the Technical Buildings compoundAcceptance of Additions or Modifications of Equipment in Technical BuildingMSP will be ensuring that Technical Buildings staff participate during acceptance of newly commissioned items/equipment that will be part of Technical Building. MSP will be supervising activities performed non-MSP in order to maintain the cleanliness and orderliness of the facility similar to before start of the activity.Alarm Handling ProcedureStandard fault management procedures through Software application.All processes related to alarm handling and repair verification as well as the relevant reporting shall be mutually agreed within two (2) months from the Contract’s Effective Date and be updated when deemed necessary.Service Improvement ProgramStudy & analysis of Technical Buildings will be conducted for 3 months after service commencement date and improvement plan will be submitted every 3 months on the following areas:• 24/7 all Technical Buildings Monitoring• Capex & Opex Management i.e., TCO• Process enhancement• Security Enhancement• Automation Methodology• 3rd Party Contracts• Risk Management• Governance Model Establishment• BCP / DRP• PM Checklist enhancements• Corrective Maintenance SOPs• Fuel / Water Leakage Detectors• Proposal to upgrade FSS, CCTV if any.• Power consumption forecastCable Landing StationThe detailed process for the cable landing stations corrective, Preventive and Scheduled Maintenance will be mutually agreed between MSP and Ooredoo prior to the Service Commencement Date. This detailed process will fulfil the following requirements:• The process fits with the established processes of Ooredoo and have no negative impact on Ooredoo’s processes in terms of cost to Ooredoo, efficiency and speed• The process describes clear responsibilities of each involved party• The process describes all reports requested by Ooredoo and delivered by MSP, format and content of these reports• Detailed description how MSP has to document corrective maintenance activities, content and format of this reports • Preparation and agreement of the maintenance schedules by MSP• Process will be documented in an electronic format• Clear description of MSP’s and Ooredoo’s obligations• Reporting format and frequency will be supplied by MSP and aligned with OoredooReporting• Handle Daily, weekly for MS activities.• Monthly reports for governance purpose• Incident reportsHealth, Safety & EnvironmentEnsure that all legislative and standard records are available and up to date, including:• All HS&E documentation• Accident books• Site specific method Statements• Site specific Risk Assessments• Ensure that all HS&E incidents recorded, investigated, actioned and reported and ensure that all equipment has been fully tested/inspected.(iii) Key Processes requiring 3PP InteractionsCustomer Complaint HandlingService desk will be established locally in each OPCO to manage the customer complaints received from Ooredoo customer care. Following will be the prime activities carried out by Service Desk.• Provide interface to customer care team• Reporting the progress on Customer complaints• Provide interface to receive all technical complaint and act as the centralized interface with the NOC • Liaise with Ooredoo Customer Care Centre handling the end-user complaints and resolve issues those identified to be technical issues related to the Ooredoo network.• Liaise with the third parties, where necessary to resolve the customer complaintsIncident ManagementIncident management process will help to restore a service to normal operation as quickly as possible and to minimize the impact on business and operations, thus ensuring that the best possible levels of service quality and availability are maintained. The process has already been described in detail under the process section.The objectives for Incident Management are to:• Restore service disruptions to the business as quickly as possible• Minimize adverse impacts during service disruptions utilizing Automations• Establish permanent resolutions or workarounds• Communicate status and expected restoration times• Follow-up with 3PPs to ensure timely restoration of servicesB2B Setup – Monitoring and Customer ComplaintsB2B monitoring will be established locally in relevant OPCO to monitor the alarms. L1 support team will be there to attend customer complaints escalated by Service desk and perform 1st level troubleshooting.                                         Figure 58 – B2B NOC SetupEricsson first level troubleshooting will provide incident management/ fault management on the trouble tickets. Necessary escalation of fault or incident will be done by L1 team towards 3PP along with continuous follow-up till issue resolution. Second level support (global) will be engaged if the incident is not resolved by first level troubleshooting team within the time frame. B2C Setup – Monitoring and Customer ComplaintsMSP will be responsible to monitor Core and transport network. B2C access network is not in scope of MSP. L1 support team will be there to attend customer complaints escalated by Service desk and perform 1st level troubleshooting.       Figure 59 – B2C NOC SetupEricsson first level troubleshooting will provide incident management/ fault	management on the trouble tickets. Necessary escalation of fault or incident will be done by L1 team towards 3PP along with continuous follow-up till issue resolution. Second level support (global) will be engaged if the incident is not resolved by first level troubleshooting team within the time frame. Reporting Ericsson will utilize the existing tools and system in Ooredoo network for raw sources of various operational reports.The template of these reports will be defined in mutual consultation during the transition phase. During this period, all formulae and inputs are verified to finalize the report template. The reports will be macro enabled and will not invite manual intervention once the format is frozen. Later, customization in reports by choosing different fields or parameters shall be possible, but formulae and input sources can’t be changed. Such customization requirements shall be discussed during regular governance meetings and will be adopted for changes if agreed in governance forum.SecurityEricsson will comply with Ooredoo Information Security Policies, Standards/ Guidelines and Process including the following -  • Third party Security Policy • Information Security Policy • Privacy Policy• Information Security Risk Management Process• Security Exception Management Procedure• Incident Management Process • Asset Management process• Information Classification, Labelling and Handling Standards• User ID and Access Control Process• Information Security Training and Awareness Process• Provide proactive advisory of Security threats specific to Managed systems (i.e., Telco Systems) and its components.  Ericsson will not deploy any Managed Service Security system/ team for security operations. Existing Ooredoo cyber security team will manage the security operations. However, Ericsson shall comply with all National Laws and regulations on Cyber Security and Data Privacy and provide required support to Ooredoo team in handling security related incidents/ threats.
C. Lean and AgileEricsson will deploy its process framework along with AI/ ML use cases for continuous process & delivery resource improvement as well as smooth running of the operations. The contribution from Ericsson ways of working reflects in the year-on-year efficiencies even though there is an approximate 5% increase in the overall BoQ every year resulting in increased work volume, thus building a lean and agile organization as network operations stabilize over a period of time. The local resources in each OpCo are already optimized so that operations can run smoothly and hence there will be no year-on-year efficiency on the local headcount.  The talent density and NOC/ NPO/ SOC resource distribution and projected yearly HC reductions are captured in detail in the ‘RFP Round 4 instructions’ document submitted by Ericsson. A summary of the headcount and efficiency in remote delivery is presented below –The effective year-on-year efficiency is much more than the figures above as additional work volume due to network growth is being absorbed by these resources.Automations and AI/ ML use cases proposed by Ericsson will lead to workload reduction in the network and be the key drivers to achieve the year-on-year headcount efficiency proposed above. An indicative work volume reduction enabling L1 team to handle more tickets thus bringing in a talent shift is represented below - Kuwait BaselineY1Y2Y3Y4Y5Total Events (alarms, …)100%80%60%55%50%45%Generated Trouble Tickets / Total Events 10%7%6%5%4%Total Trouble Tickets 8%4%3%3%2%       Work-In Tickets100%96%82%70%65%60%   - Of which are Customer Complains27%26%25%23%22%21%   - Of which are Automated Tickets64%62%50%42%39%35%   - Of which are Manual Tickets9%8%7%5%4%4%       Work-Out Tickets100%96%82%70%65%60%   - Of Which are autoresolved0%5%8%11%12%12%   - Of Which are managed by L11%22%17%13%12%10.5%   - Of Which are managed by L234%10%7%6%4.8%4%   - Of Which are managed by L3         - Of Which are managed by FLM65%60%49%41%36.7%33.3%   - Of Which are managed by Optimization      Please refer Round 5 Instructions worksheet for more details on AI/ ML use cases and associated efficiencies.The managed services value chain includes the set of end-to-end functions and activities that Ericsson will perform to deliver Managed Services to Ooredoo and supports Ericsson’s value proposition and outcome-based agreements. The value chain is composed of three value streams – Create, Sustain & Evolve. Activities are performed in an agile and adaptive approach across the value chain by skilled people and/ or machine effort.Figure 60 – MS Value Chain                                            Figure 61 – Continuous Improvement Cycle Ericsson will follow a continuous improvement and collaboration approach with Ooredoo as illustrated in the figure above to meet the following Critical to Quality factors for Managed Services Operations –CTQ FactorDetailsExamplesFasterCycle time Reduction (Before and After)Response time for acknowledging request raisedSmarterMeasurements for Automation supported by ML / AI.% of Field sites resolved with augmented reality, MLSimplerWaste / Rework Reduction; Waiting / Differed Time reduction; Active /vs Non-Active Time (Flow Efficiency)Time delay for execution of changeCheaperReturn on Investment; Input vs Output; Reduction in Effort Hours (Before and After)Work Orders resolved by ARPsQuality & AccuracyCSAT, First Time Right (FTR), etc.Number of Changes executed First Time Right.Volume BasedNumber of activities completed in a certain period.Total no. of TTs Resolved per month for all SeveritiesComplianceCompliance of the process to regulatory requirements, Compliance to Customer and Ericsson policyPercentage of TTs with Breached SLAContinual Service ImprovementContinual Improvement of ServiceNumber of CSI initiatives / opportunities Received in a period
D. Digital Transformation, Automation and AIThis section illustrates few of Ericsson’s digital capabilities including digital transformation through AI strategy which Ericsson proposes to follow.Figure 62 – EOE TransformationFigure 63 – Short to Medium Transformation strategyFigure 64 – Medium to Long Term Transformation strategyFigure 65 – Worst Cell List EnhancementFigure 66 – Uplink Interference AnalysisFigure 67 – Worst Cell List vs Issue ClassificationFigure 68 – Worst Cell AnalysisFigure 69 – Swap Sector Analysis       Figure 70– Customer Complaint HandlingFigure 71– Service Desk Automation Figure 72 – VIP Complaint Handling Process Flow Figure 73 – NPS Improvement Process Flow	(i) Details of some of the EIO passive use cases -Figure 74 – Battery Management & OptimizationFigure 75 – Battery Right SizingFigure 76 – Battery OptimizationFigure 77 – DG ManagementFigure 78 – DG Run hour ReductionFigure 79 – Optimized Fuel FillingFigure 80 – Grid ManagementFigure 81 – Rectifier ManagementFigure 82 – Operational EfficiencyUCs proposed for Kuwait:Figure 83 – UC ProposedUCs proposed for Oman & Qatar Figure 84 – UC proposedReferencesFigure 85 – UC ReferenceFigure 86 – UC Reference (ii) Predictive Cell Energy Management overview (EIO Active)Predictive Cell Energy Management (PCEM) is a multi-vendor, multi technology predictive AI/ML solution. PCEM identifies the best energy saving action on a cell level based on historical trend/traffic analysis and without impacting customer experience. Energy saving action implementation policies and thresholds are defined together with customer to avoid unintended outcomes.This is done through our Recommendation Engine that decides which cells can be locked at which specific time intervals and/or which configuration parameters should be sent to RAN features, based on insights derived from Intelligence Engine. Closed loop automation architecture which can be deployed and actuate locking/unlocking of cells and configure RAN features, including real-time monitoring to avoid impacts to customer experience.Figure 87 – EIO Recommendation EngineSolution ComponentsAs visualized below, Predictive Cell Energy Management consists of two key functional modules: Intelligence & Recommendation and Actuation, each based on a set of critical components. These are described in the following section in greater detail.The RAN Feature Dynamic Configuration, Threshold Optimizer and Traffic Tuner are optional features and could be offered to the solution at a later stage.The included features are 2G/3G/4G/5G Cell/RRU Lock and 5G Deep Sleep.Figure 88 – Predictive Cell Energy ManagementIntelligence & Recommendation EnginePolicy Manager (included in solution offer)PCEM supports the personalization of configuration files for all the AI modules and actuations methods to achieve the desired results. Inspired from an e-commence platform, the personalization system is highly flexible and allows the user to define the policies for how the AI should work to derive energy savings as per network priorities. Policy manager supports two levels of personalization: ML and Action personalization system.ML Personalization System: E-commerce inspired personalization system allowing to have the right touch points to derive the energy saving per N/W priorities. It is a highly flexible and extendable service-based module.Action Personalization System: Action personalization can be based on the decision on reactivity in unlocking the cells at sudden traffic increase.               Figure 89 – Actuation Type Vs Energy Savings PotentialThreshold Optimizer (optional feature)Detailed data analysis of KPIs and energy consumed over a period have revealed that the load on sites and users are directly proportional to energy consumption and inversely proportional to energy savings. With increasing number of users and load on site, energy savings decrease and after an optimal point the linear relationship between energy savings and traffic load becomes nonlinear. Beyond this point with sustainable energy savings the KPI degradations becomes severe and vice versa.So, the question is what is the maximum traffic offload achievable from source cell to destination cell so that it does not significantly impact average throughput or network KPIs while maximizing energy saving?The answer to this critical question can be provided with the combination of advanced statistical, optimization (gradient descent theory) and machine learning to find the right balance between site traffic load (users and physical resource block) versus average throughput while considering the optimal energy savings.                     Figure 90 – Energy vs ThroughputThe module which helps to find the right balance between traffic load and throughput vs energy savings is called Threshold Optimizer. Threshold Optimizer is designed to identify the sector load conditions when it would be possible to lock the capacity layers and traffic on capacity layers can be migrated to coverage layers without degrading network performance or within customer acceptable throughput impact.Prediction Engine (included in solution offer)Upon receiving the traffic thresholds to lock the capacity layers, it is required to predict when such traffic conditions will be met on a sector or capacity and coverage cells, this form of time predictions are provided by the prediction engine. The Prediction Engine utilizes the historical network performance and energy measurement data on cell level (PM Counters) to be able to estimate the time windows of when the input thresholds can be realized and produces a list of cells which can be locked at which specific time intervals and/or which configuration parameters should be sent to RAN energy saving features.Output of the Prediction Engine is the run books for decided energy saving actions on cell level (for the next day) which are segregated based on the chosen implementations (cell locking, deep sleep activation etc.) and their timing. Automation engine executes these runbooks in closed loop automation fashion, where actuations can be to actuate locking/unlocking of cells or RRUs, activation of deep sleep and/or configure RAN features, including real-time monitoring to avoid impacts to customer experience.Energy consumption reporting & Cell energy profiler (included in solution offer)To provide a clear picture of the energy savings generated from PCEM along with the actions performed to generate the savings, PCEM provides personalized dashboards to support the users. Three different dashboards are available: Business, KPI, Technical DashboardsBusiness DashboardAllows the Network Operation and Business teams to access network operation insights generated by ML algorithms available within the solution. Platform shows the results of site locking hours at different network levels (e.g. Network, Region, Cluster, Subcluster, Site etc.). It also shows the computed Energy Savings, Cost Savings, CO2 Emission Reduction. This is done in three view levels: Network view, Region/Cluster level view, Site viewFigure 91 – Business Dashboard: Network – Region level view exampleFigure 92 – Business Dashboard: Site level view example.Network KPI DashboardBuilt to track the impact on the Network KPIs after implementing PCEM in the network, this dashboard allows the Network Operation and Business teams to access the important network KPIs configured for the customer. Platform shows the results of network KPIs based on filters provided on the GUI (e.g., Interval, Region, Clutter Type, Technology-Vendor, Sites etc.). It also shows the comparison of KPIs’ data with the predefined previous “Interval”.Technical DashboardThe Technical Dashboard GUI allows the Technical Operation team visibility of important configurations for the customer. Platform shows the results of the technical dashboard basedFigure 93 – Network KPI Dashboardon filters provided on the GUI (e.g., time-period, technology vendor, locking type, clutter type, region, etc.). It also compares technical data to the previously defined "time period."Figure 94 – Technical DashboardClose Loop Automation (included in solution offer)PCEM has the flexibility and granularity to be able to identify the best energy saving actions to take for a specific site for a specific moment, and then executes the selected energy saving action with closed loop automation. The different energy saving actions supported by PCEM are locking/unlocking of cells, RRU locking, deep sleep activation, RRU hardware shutdown and/or dynamic configuration of the RAN energy saving features.Cell locking (3G/4G/5G, included feature)PCEM’s cell locking energy saving action shuts down capacity cells and making the remaining available coverage and capacity cells support the traffic needs. PCEM performs the cell locking action with a graceful shutdown to have no or minimum KPI impact from any change introduced by the solution. This scenario is visualized and explained below.              Figure 95 – Cell LockingThe actuation engine requests the cell locking towards the OSS with special remarks to consider the ongoing traffic and its type. For normal calls/sessions, PCEM would allow subscribers to move from the cell which is a candidate to be locked to a neighboring cell within a predefined time window. If any user fails to find the best suitable neighboring cell, that call will drop after a predefined timer. This helps to reduce the call drop rate in traffic with negligible impact on the size of energy savings. If there is an emergency call going on which is utilizing the candidate cell, the cell will not be locked. Remote Radio Unit (RRU) Locking (3G/4G, included feature)Each RRU consumes different amounts of power dependent on the specific load level such as:- 100% Radio frequency (RF) output power – maximum radio unit power consumption- 0% RF output power – minimum radio unit power consumption with Power amplifier (PA) in On-mode - Cell disabled – minimum power consumption with PA in Off-modePCEM enables a radio unit to be disabled with minimum power consumption and switches off the PA to further reduce power consumption. PCEM identifies the opportunity window to lock radios when they are not servicing any cell by referring their configuration across multiple Radio Access Technologies (RAT). The snapshot below illustrates a scenario where power consumption for a given radio 4428 is minimum when a cell is disabled - this state is possible via Remote Radio Unit (RRU) lock.Figure 96 – Cell LockedDeep sleep activation (5G, included feature)Ericsson’s Massive MIMO radios have an inbuilt feature called “Radio Deep Sleep mode” which decreases the power consumption of the Massive MIMO radios when all cells and sector carriers on the radio are locked. This RAN feature cannot be in “always enabled” mode as it requires the cell to be locked, and PCEM is ordered to both identify when the deep sleep mode should be activated and trigger its activation as well as deactivation. Deep sleep activation is dependent on the set of radios of Ericsson Radio Deep Sleep feature having three states:• Activated: When feature is set as “enabled” and all the subsequent cells and cell sector carriers are locked.	• Deactivated: When feature is set to “disabled” and all the subsequent cells and cell sector carriers are unlocked.• Requested: When feature is set to “enable” or “disable” but its subsequent cells and cell sector carriers are not in the required state of “locked” or “unlocked”.Dynamic RAN Feature Configuration (included feature)PCEM supports the fine tuning of Ericsson power saving RAN feature Cell Sleep Mode. In densely populated areas, overlaid cells (coverage and capacity) are deployed and remain active even in the low traffic hours - hence consuming energy.With Cell Sleep Mode the overlaid capacity cells can themselves detect low traffic conditions, based on the thresholds configured while activating this feature. With confirmed support from overlaid capacity and coverage cells, the traffic will turn on the overlaid capacity cells when required.When capacity cells turn off the traffic, it is offloaded to the coverage cells. Below image is an example of site having two layers in each sector one as a coverage and another as capacity.      Figure 97 – Dynamic ConfigurationThe configuration parameters necessary to make this feature activated are:• Configuration for coverage cells • Configuration for capacity cells • Timer cells During the network-wide implementation of Cell Sleep Mode, the thresholds and timers are often kept similar for all cells (so called “blanket configuration”) which in return gives sub optimal results. However, the effectiveness of the feature can be increased by configuring the Cell Sleep Mode thresholds against each cell by studying the cell’s traffic behavior, which is supported by PCEM.PCEM automatically configures different thresholds within a day by considering the traffic profile of a cell at different periods of the day. PCEM configures all the parameters above to increase the energy efficiency of Cell Sleep Mode.RRU Hardware shutdown (optional feature)Putting a radio unit into sleep mode by a soft lock command minimizes the power consumption of the radio, but the radio unit will still consume power in the standby mode. PCEM’s hardware shutdown action will allow a complete shutdown of radio units which reduces the power consumption of radio to 0 kwh. This energy saving action is only possible when smart switches integrated with site controllers are installed on the site which can communicate with PCEM. Realtime Monitoring AlgorithmPCEM generates the energy saving by turning off the capacity layers and migrating traffic to coverage layers using the graceful shutdown available with OEMs or by optimizing the RAN features. The prediction engine of PCEM provides the locking windows with high accuracy based on the historical traffic trend of the coverage and capacity layers & recommends performing soft lock cell and RRU. However, it is still required to continuously monitor the sector traffic post locking to react in case of any uncertainty or sudden traffic surge.The PCEM module which performs the continuous cell traffic and alarm monitoring is Real Time Monitoring.Real Time monitoring supports two level of monitoring.• KPI Monitoring: Real time monitoring module analyses the Performance counter data in every 15 mins and compares the KPI values with the unlocking condition produced by threshold optimizer for a given sector.      As soon as the condition meets, the real time monitoring module triggers the rollback API and unlocks the cells• Alarm Monitoring: Real time monitoring module continuously monitors the alarm data at regular interval of approx. 5 mins, in case any high priority service affecting alarm appears on the site, the module immediately triggers the rollback API and unlock the cellsReferences/’;.6qrFigure 98 – UC Reference Figure 99 – UC ReferenceFigure 100 – UC Reference(iii) RAN Cognitive Software PlatformEricsson AI Cognitive Radio Network Planning and Optimization SoftwareEricsson AI Cognitive Radio Network Planning and Optimization software is a state-of-the-art, multi-technology, multi-vendor big data platform which encompasses AI centric use cases applied across the network design and optimization life cycle. The SW ecosystem provides OG a future proof operational framework given the anticipated growth in network complexity. Being a state-of-the-art big data platform, the traditional benefits it brings, typically referred as the “three Vs of Big Data”, are:• Velocity: Understood as having a platform ready to process data in near real- time. This of course depends on the investment on hardware and its configuration.• Volume: Understood as the capability of Bid Data platform to store massive amount of data both raw and processed. As mentioned above a proper hardware dimensioning is required.• Variety: Understood as being able to import different input data from different sources.Ericsson value is to add its significant and recognized domain knowledge to incorporate additional “Vs” that are relevant, such as:Veracity: Understood as being able to incorporate information that really matters and reflects accurately the status of the network and its users:• Best practices consistently applied• Inbuilt domain expertise• Unveiling hidden patterns• Predictive capabilities• Solving geolocation inaccuracies with Ericsson featuresValue: Understood as providing real impact when it comes to implement recommendations thanks to analytics and powerful data mining activities:• Providing best in class performance• Analytical dashboards• Targeted investment• Shorter TTM (faster problem identification, quicker solution and lower customer impact)• Competitor’s insights• End Customer viewFigure 101: Cognitive Software big data platform valueSummary of main benefits:• Drastic OPEX rationalization through massive automation of network performance analysis, troubleshooting and benchmarking activities (shall be captured and communicated to OG during due diligence phase)• Improved Quality of Service through network-wide availability and application of best-in-class troubleshooting practices and know-how.• Enhanced performance through early identification of upcoming network problems, facilitating pre-emptive corrective actions.• Faster reaction to network incidences.Ericsson Cognitive Radio Network Planning and Optimization Software Platform ArchitectureThe high-level architecture of Ericsson Cognitive Radio Network Planning and Optimization platform and its main functional units are illustrated below	        Figure 102: The Cognitive Radio Network Design and Optimization platform architectureOG network ENM/Multivendor OSS: The data for the platform is collected from the network management and operations support systems in the network. The data is automatically collected via an automated data pipeline.The big data cluster: the raw data processing part running on the Hadoop Cluster, that retrieves various structured and unstructured data from external sources and parses the files while performing some additional calculations on the data. Resulting data is finally structured in databases. Middleware: This is an Application Program Interface (API) that allows to request a subset of post-processed reports by the platform with the data from OG’s network. This API is only open externally to OG on request basis.Application Layer: the layer where the machine learning algorithms and software functions reside. User interface: A set of web-based Graphical User Interfaces (GUIs) that present the data to the system user. Ericsson AI Cognitive Radio Network Planning & Optimization Software ModulesCognitive PlanningThe Cognitive Planning SW value pack includes the Capacity Planning module.Capacity Planning module will offer OG a different way of estimating CAPEX investment (SMART CAPEX planning). Instead of being reactive, that is based on actual capacity utilization, it takes advantage of AI techniques to be able to predict utilization KPIs in a pre-defined time horizon. This enables to anticipate to capacity bottlenecks and target investment in areas that make sense in a highly accurate manner.Main benefits are:• Shift the dimensioning process from a reactive approach to a proactive one, where bottlenecks can be solved before they happen targeted investment • Consistent dimensioning process is applied• Identifies the right capacity to meet the planned QoS goals, eliminating overspending due to inaccurate planningInput data is a combination of objective metrics such as network KPIs with the possibility of importing subjective metrics at cell level such as NPS. It also ingests Configuration and Performance Management from OSS and allows defining a customized workflow to accommodate to operator expansion flow.Once input data is loaded, first task is to perform traffic forecasting based on actual historical data at cell level, this allows an accurate traffic forecastBased on actual traffic combined with cell-level performance management, Machine Learning models are trained at cell-level to be able to predict utilization KPIs in the future. Each utilization KPI will have a Machine Learning model based on regressionNext step is to define bottlenecks that will be triggered based on forecasted traffic and predicted utilization KPIs. User can define these rules in a flexible way and get the number and location of bottlenecks for the forecasted timelineBottlenecks are solved using different dimensioning tasks:• Load balancing: It happens within the same sector that has more than 2 carriers. A load balancing traffic offload is simulated by the tool and shows how many bottlenecks are solved• Carrier Addition: It is possible to define how many carriers and its characteristics so that bottlenecks are solved. • Sector Addition: New sectors can be added to reduce the load• New Site Addition: New sites can be proposed to solve bottlenecksThe order of these actions can be defined by the end user, typically the flow would be the one presented above but it may be the case where steps are removed or with different order. This allows to play with different scenarios and show the customer the best one or a set of them. Some examples of potential use cases:Capacity Planning • Different traffic forecast traffic growths for different markets (urban, rural…)• Different bottlenecks criterion for different cells• Analysis of new sites vs only carriers and load balancingBesides functionality mentioned above, a use case for Spectrum Refarming from 3G to 4G is also supported.Figure 103: Capacity Planning ModuleValue is found in the following areas:• Low value and high manual effort tasks reduction by 60% based on comparisons between manual work and tool way of working done in trials• Fast execution times which enable to simulate multiple scenarios to find optimum dimensioning scenarios. Based on trials outcomes, only 5 minutes are required to dimension 15K cells in LTE networks• High accuracy in Machine Learning prediction models are they are trained by default with more than 10k samples per predicted KPI and cellCognitive Design The Cognitive Design SW value pack includes two modules. RF Design and Site Selection.The RF Design and Site Selection modules leverage on Call Trace data to provide an accurate RF Design proposal for design phase. By RF Design it is understood physical parameters in the site such as tilts or azimuths, parameters change such as PCI or RSI and finally site selection.Traditional RF Design and Site Selection tools are based on predictions and/or drive test which may fail to capture:• End user experience (indoor users, terminal variety)• Traffic location• Accurate pathloss estimation typically more optimistic than realityRF Design and Site Selection modules benefit from Call Traces to overcome above mentioned challenges, adding timing advance statistics, geolocated traffic per cell, performance indicators per cell among others to overcome problems mentioned above.On top of that, the tools can prioritize the changes to be implemented from those having more impact in the RF environment than others, allowing a cost-efficient implementation.Main use cases are:• RF Design & Optimization• Site Selection for Network consolidation, expansion, mergers• Hot Spot Finder (i.e., coverage and capacity holes detection)• Parameter Planning: RSI, PCI • Overshooting Detection and optimization• ROI AnalysisFigure 104: RF Design and Site Selection ModulesValue of the tools is linked to:• OPEX reduction as leveraging on OSS data reduces the need of drive test and expensive propagation model purchase• Accuracy as optimization engine is drive by real traffic reflecting user experience instead of simulated traffic• Scoring mechanism based on internal cost function that assess how efficient is a certain design based on a given criterion (coverage, quality, capacity)Cognitive Tuning The Cognitive Tuning SW value pack includes the Virtual Drive Test moduleThe Virtual Drive Test module leverages on the geolocation of call traces to provide comprehensive digital maps for analysis, reporting and proposal of changes. It is one of the key components of Driveless projects. Virtual Drive Test aims to minimize the use of drive test in both tuning and optimization activities by leveraging in OSS data.Main benefits are:• OPEX reduction in drive test for tuning and optimization• Enhanced user visibility compared with drive test as all users in all locations are measured with a wide range of terminals and including both outdoor and indoor measurements• Provides insights and analytics beyond the traditional drive test such as traffic, UL visibility and more samples with similar accuracy than drive test using RAN featuresInput data contains Configuration Management and Call Traces which are used to geolocate and produce digital maps or raster with flexible pixel size and calculation aggregations such as average, median, min, max… Geolocation is done with proprietary techniques based on combination of centroid, timing advance and Angle of Arrival. In general, it can be said that the denser the environment is the more accurate geolocation will be, so it can be expected to have more accuracy on urban than in rural scenarios.To improve geolocation accuracy, Virtualized Drive Test use case can leverage on 3GPP defined features such as MDT (4G) which will make terminal to report its GPS latitude and longitude. With this approach, accuracy is on par compared to traditional drive testMain use cases are:• Call Trace parsing, assembling and geo-location• Drive-less KPI report and raster analysis for single site verification and tuning activities• RDT/MDT Support for GPS accuracy• Polygon Support• Indoor/Outdoor & Mobility classification• Signaling flow browser• Advanced VoLTE and MBB RCA based on Analytics• IMSI/IMEI analysis (optional)Figure 105: Virtualized Drive Test ModuleCognitive Optimization  In Cognitive Optimization SW value pack, Ericsson offers the Performance Diagnostics module.Performance DiagnosticsPerformance Diagnostics includes multiple features: • RAN-Troubleshooting (RAN-TS)• Cell Issue Classifier (CIC)• Uplink Interference Classifier (UIC)• Root Cause Analysis (RCA)RAN-Troubleshooting (RAN-TS) feature Enables user daily troubleshooting based on the correlation of CM and PM processed information. This feature aims to assist engineers in daily troubleshooting activities by leveraging on network data and automating data processing and reporting. The different level of analytics includes a visual approach, helping to identify worst offenders on the map and drill down to the root cause. The second level of analysis is more analytical where reports (predefine or customized) will be providing worst offenders to speed up analysis. RAN-TS also supports parameter consistency checks.Figure 106: Performance Diagnostics: RAN Troubleshooting FeatureBased on Ericsson patent-pending deep machine learning models, Cell Issue Classifier (CIC) and Uplink Interference Classifier (UIC) features are the ultimate tools to leverage on an automatic way to discover and classify problems in the network. The current industry practice for performance management is built on rule-based systems. It has the following main drawbacks:• Depends on human capabilities, typically developer capability• Non-adaptative thresholds, user defines a hard threshold and may not be efficient as time passes• Limited KPI input, human can typically work with 8-10 different KPIs to create a ruleThat is why, in Ericsson we have decided to go for a machine learning approach since:• It can unveil and uncover hidden patterns• Can work with massive amount of data – whole network in one go• Classifies problems up to different classes with a given probabilityWith Cell Issue Classifier (CIC) feature the machine learning model is capable of classifying thousands of cells in minutes. The output is a specific issue for each cell that’s ready for human or machine action. The model can classify up to 21 different coverage, capacity, and performance issues with priority for action. Using multiple Deep Neural Networks Algorithms running in sequence, each cell will be classified with one of multiple issues where one option can be that cell is behaving normally. For CIC as an example it is multi-label Classifier meaning that more than one issue can be identified for same cell in case more than one performance KPI is impacted, then each issue will have a certain Classification probability which is like Model Confidence level along with some other supporting measures like but not limited to Continuity of the issue , according to certain criteria those cells will be applied to Root Cause Analysis module which has some defined rules/checks like some certain parameter/Features settings and at the end some recommendations will be available for deployment.            Figure 107: Performance Diagnostics: Cell Issue Classifier FeatureWith Uplink Interference Classifier (UIC), the machine learning model is capable of classifying uplink problems into issues caused by traffic, external interference, or hardware problems. It can classify 33 different uplink issues with an output that’s ready for human or machine action.                         			Figure 108: Performance Diagnostics: Uplink Issue Classifier FeatureThe Root Cause Analysis (RCA) feature combines Ericsson deep domain knowledge and the AI powered classifications (CIC/UIC) to provide an actionable insight at cell level. The automatic actionable insights will address network problems, improve network quality, and ultimately improve on customer experience in a fast and timely manner, while having a positive impact on customer churn.  The RCA features consist of +214 automated analysis checks for the AI classifications; these are derived from Ericsson deep domain knowledge as mentioned earlier.               Figure 109: Performance Diagnostics: RCA FeatureMulti-Vendor Support Ericsson AI Cognitive Radio Network Design and Optimization software is supporting multi-vendor and multi-technology networks. In this context Cognitive Software driven operations can deliver transparent and unbiased insights and analytics. These enable operators to achieve optimum network performance and subscriber satisfaction in highly complex networks.The figure below illustrates how Cognitive Software vendor agnostic AI algorithms can be deployed in complex multi-vendor networks.      Figure 109: Cognitive Software Multi-Vendor network deploymentEricsson strategy for platforms is to maximize the reuse of existing tools and platforms available with OG. Ericsson shall inject the cognitive software to complement the gap existent with current OG managed service suppliers and other vendors.The plan for cognitive software is to go with full Ericsson RAN area support from Year1 for all proposed SW modules and maintain it for Year 2 till Year 5.The plan for cognitive software is to go with selected SW modules for Huawei RAN areas support from Year1 and expand the modules over Year 2 till Year 5 based on R&D multivendor support, validation, and availability.The tables below summarize the AI Cognitive Software multi-vendor capabilities, which is an active area of evolution with Ericsson product development and R&D units.• YES, means supported as of today• R&D means included in the platform global roadmap, development ongoing• Tentative implies the tentative readiness of the corresponding use caseFigure 110: Cognitive Software - Multivendor SupportNetwork BOQ considered for Cognitive SoftwareThe below network BOQ is considered for scoping of the Cognitive Software. Including only 4G and 5G Technologies. Qatar YearPhysical SitesLogical SitesCells Cell Carrier20243718           18,684             53,324          254,942 20253888           20,627             60,232          279,519 20263961           21,014             61,363          284,768 20274073           21,609             63,098          292,820 20284185           22,203             64,833          300,872  Kuwait  Physical SitesLogical SitesCells Cell Carrier202429661490542539         203,378 202531211655848350         224,378 202632391718450178         232,861 202733691787452192         242,207 202834991856354205         251,553  Oman Physical SitesLogical SitesCells Cell Carrier202428151414640373         193,024 202528971537044879         208,274 202629581569345824         212,659 202730251604946862         217,476 202830931640947916         222,365  Consolidated Physical SitesLogical SitesCells Cell Carrier2024949947735136236         651,344 2025990652554153461         712,170 20261015853891157365         730,287 20271046755531162152         752,502 20281077757175166954         774,789 High-level Project Delivery Time PlanThe figure below depicts a tentative high level time plan for deployment of the Ericsson Cognitive Radio Network Design and Optimization Software.The final one will be shared during the detailed solution preparation phase.                            				Figure 111: High-Level Delivery Time Plan(iv) Crowd Data AnalyticsEricsson shall reuse OG crowdsource data provided by OG suppliers (tutela or others) to perform in depth analysis of the collected data for performance, optimization and user experience enhancement purposes.Main benefits are:• Enables massive data collection form end users in the network showing their actual behavior• Enables KPI creation from those samples and geolocation in a map with GPS precision• With the above, it is possible to compare different Operators or the same Operator at different timeValue of this module is found in:• Minimizes the need of costly benchmarking drive test to compare Operator’s performance and in cases of swap/modernization• Multivendor native, supported any vendor and technology (provided UEs are available)• Collects data from virtually any country (number of samples may differ from country to country)(v) Existing Platforms ReuseAs recommended by OG and aligned with Ericsson strategy, Ericsson shall reuse existing platforms and tools made available by OG and/or 3PP vendors and other suppliers.• Nokia Netact and Cloud Netact• Huawei U2000, Huawei U2020• Cisco Network Management Systems• IP Network Management Systems• NFMP for Nokia IP and GNMI for Cisco IP• Probes• All other available platforms and tools that facilitate RAN, Transport and Core optimization• In Ericsson area, Ericsson team will be using: Ericsson Network Management (ENM) and Ericsson Network IQ (ENIQ)It is assumed OG shall grant full right access to all network management systems and all platforms for Ericsson staff working on the RAN, Transport and CORE optimization along access to all the nodes and equipment in the network.
E. Transition & Governance This section describes the Ericsson transition plan covering all aspects of transition (tools, human resource etc.) and the governance plan.The aim of Transition is to move the operational responsibility from Ooredoo Operated Networks to Ericsson. This must be done in a seamless manner, without any interruption of the service or any negative impact of the Quality of Service delivered to Ooredoo’s end users. The key for success is detailed planning in combination with a structured and secure project execution; to manage the complexity in this type of transition. Ericsson has vast experience from successful handling of numerous similar multi-vendor transition projects globally. Ericsson’s structured and Integrated Transition delivery method to take over operations is based on Project Management Model PROPS-C (The Project for Project Steering)This Transition plan describes how the Transition project team is formed and how the executable projects plan is created and jointly approved. This document outlines the areas, deliverables and milestones that must be considered when creating the executable project plan and clarifies the roles and responsibilities. It also describes how a Joint Steering Group shall be established and thereby securing both parties control during the duration of the Transition project.(i) Transition MethodologyTransition Preparation will commence one month before transition period immediately after contract signature.Detailed Tools DD/analysis will be initiated two months before transition period to ensure basic tools deployment before Service Commencement Date.Transition execution part will commence at Effective Date for a period of 3 months.Stabilization Period (grace period) for 3 months from service commencement date where Service Credits will not apply.Steady State with continuous improvement after the transformation period until the end of the contractListed below are the main transition project deliverables. Ericsson will make sure that all relevant and needed projects streams are included from the very beginning with clear deliverables and expectation for Ooredoo.Figure 111 - Transition deliverablesEricsson responsibilities:• Provide project management for the total Transition project with milestones.• Establish a Transition project team.• Involve appropriate people in the Joint Steering Group. • Participate in communication activities within Ooredoo & EricssonOoredoo responsibilities:• Provide information and knowledge needed for Transition• Participate in communication activities within Ooredoo & Ericsson • Establish a Transition project team as a mirror of the Ericsson team with adequate knowledge & competence to perform tasks as described in this section• Secure participation of the same key persons during the whole Transition project as agreed prior to Transition execution • Involve appropriate people from Ooredoo in the Joint Steering Group meetings(ii) Transition StepsThe key requirement to have a successful transition is to prepare a detailed planning in combination with a structured and secure project execution; to manage the complexity in this type of transitions. Ericsson has vast experience from successful handling of numerous similar projects globally.The transition plan should describe how the transition project team is formed and how the executable projects plan is created and jointly approved between Ooredoo and Ericsson.This document outlines the areas, deliverables and milestones that must be considered when creating the executable project plan and clarifies the roles and responsibilities. It also describes how a Joint Steering Group shall be established and thereby securing both parties control during the duration of the Transition project.  Analysis and PlanningDuring this phase Ericsson will perform the following activities.• Analyze the operational solution, Transition strategies and plans.• Make detailed plans and secure resources for the Transition planning phase, making sure all Operation Engine components and capabilities get sufficient attention:o Components: processes; delivery organization; tools, automation & AI/ML environment; data.o Capabilities: Data driven operation (e.g., SOC, NOC, Field Services) and Intelligent Optimization,• Define project scope, objectives, and deliverables.• Prepare Transition project specification i.e., organization, time-plan, and budget.• Plan and solicit resources for Transition execution.• Hands shake the analysis and planning outcome with joint transition steering committee.Transition ExecutionDuring this step Ericsson jointly with Ooredoo will perform the following activities.• Establish sub-projects and build project teams.• Initiate interaction with Ooredoo ‘mirrored’ project.• Execute transition activities according to plans.• Prepare detailed plans per sub-projects.• Perform risk mitigation and initiate change management.• Ensure that Ericsson Operations Management will be placed appropriately to take operational responsibility.• Prepare and sign-off Working Level Agreements.• Ensure integration of project deliverables.• Perform Operational Readiness Review and Test.Transition HandoverThe final step during the transition will consist of handing over the transition projects to the Ericsson Managed Service team to kick off the service commencement and follow up on the following key activities.• Support Operations Management during start-up of operations.• Hand-over deliverables to defined receivers and ensure that acceptance is formally acknowledged.• Identify any outstanding issue and agree on transfer of responsibility.• Document transition experiences.(iii) Transition PlanThe transition project’s primary objective is to ensure operational readiness activities prior to the service commencement. Considering the scope of the Ooredoo Managed Services contract, Ericsson will execute an transition project to achieve operational readiness 2 months prior to the service commencement date.The Ericsson transition project team will be mandated to establish operations, hardware / software trouble shooting, alarm management, preventive maintenance, planned maintenance, corrective maintenance, fault management, configuration management and optimization for the technology domains in scope.The transition project will ensure that the right resources with the right competences are in place at the date of service commencement.Ericsson will run a structured transition project making use of timely and cost-effective delivery capabilities, leveraging on the existing Ericsson best practices gained from local capabilities. The Ericsson goal is to bring everything needed for Ooredoo network operations readiness without disrupting the quality of the performed services.(iv) Transition Governance To cover all activities in scope, Ericsson will build a set of sub-projects for the Ooredoo transition. Ericsson and Ooredoo shall jointly set-up the transition project-team. The transition governance model can be illustrated as follow.         			Figure 112: Transition governance modelOoredoo will have complete control by being part of a Steering Group for the transition phase, all the way through the process. Ooredoo should mirror Ericsson sub-projects to have a proper joint transition steering group to manage the overall transition sub-projects.Transition governance will cover the following.• Status Tracking of Planned Trainings and Assignments.• Phase end Deliverables Review by Transition Management Team.• Phase Completion Reports.• Transition Review Meetings.• Management Review Meetings.• Executive Forum Meetings.(v) Transition Project InterfacesEricsson will nominate an overall transition project manager supported by sub-project managers. Ooredoo is requested to nominate an overall transition Manager and single point of contacts for applicable sub-projects to interface with Ericsson transition project team. The objective of Ericsson and Ooredoo transition Project teams will be to ensure success of the transition project and actively contributed to solutions to issues as and when they arise.The transition project interfaces can be illustrated below.Figure 113 - Transition mirror organizationEricsson will nominate an overall Transition project manager supported by sub-project managers.Figure 114: Illustrates Transition Project OrganizationBusiness Interface & ProcessesThis sub-project covers:• The set-up of processes for the business-related activities at Ooredoo (demand organization) and Ericsson.• The transition of these activities and the closing down of Ooredoo business related activities.Main areas of responsibility shall be • Prepare WLAs/OLAs with Ooredoo’s different related departments and its related vendors.) • Establish escalation procedure.• Integrate Ooredoo’s operations processes into Ericsson processes.• Preparation and finalization of Ericsson and Ooredoo Governance structure.HR & CommunicationThis recruitment and transition project will ensure that Ericsson, and Ooredoo will take all the necessary steps both in respect of the employment laws as well as ensuring full engagement of the people affected by the change. The project will identify the resources (key contributors) and competence gaps prior to service commencement.Key Milestones (see picture below) for the HR and Communication activities are:• Prepare and execute the Tell Day (if applicable) - here Ericsson will also inform the employees on how they can apply for positions in Ericsson as an employer.• Offer day – where the transferred employees receive the employment offer• Service Commencement dateFigure 115: HR Milestones for HR and Communication activitiesPre-transition and transition are the phases where Ericsson identifies, understands, and addresses the concerns from various target groups. A detailed project plan will be developed during the pre-transition.Employee CommunicationEricsson believes that regular communication with staff during and post transition is a keyway to ensure employees remain engaged. During a period of change it is our experience that this area is the most vital to ensure a smooth transition with minimal impact to the service.The communication plan which is normally designed as a joint plan and forms part of the overall transition plan outlines the key activities including:• Management of external media, regulatory and third-party communication in partnership with the customer.• Joint development of internal communication plans for Ericsson and the customer and supporting material for presentations and briefings.• Content of “Day 1” presentation and management of question-and-answer sessionsSourcingIt is Ericsson responsibility to choose best ASPs (Contractors) if applicable to fulfil the MS contract scope where required. Also, commercial discussion and contract terms & conditions with ASPs is Ericsson sole responsibilities. Ericsson might make use of existing ASPs (Contractors) Ericsson shall;Identify major ASPs / scopes.• Prepare frame agreement for ASPs.• Ensure subcontractors are ready for network handover.• Monitor subcontractor performance to ensure compliance with SLA.Assets & Premises• Provide list of in-scope assets to be transferred (tools, SW licenses, Spares, Consumables), if applicable.• A comprehensive list of all hardware and software assets to be transferred, including laptops, desktops, servers, installed software, supporting licenses, modems, data cards, mobile phones, phone subscriptions, projectors, printers, scanners, PBX etc.• Any acquired (transitioned) assets to be audited and classified; deployed, “transformed” or disposed.• Financial impacts assessed and reported.• Asset management regulations and procedures applied to all acquired assets.• List of current premises used for the operations.• Original configuration files of all implemented HW/SW received.• Allocate and prepare the required workspace for Ericsson MS staff in Ooredoo office.• Current Offices setup (Facility support and maintenance, Furniture, Telephone, Fire, Security, Electricity, Standby Generators, etc. that MS will use to run the operation.• IT / Internet connectivity specially to access Ericsson Global Tools (MSDP) / Processes / Intranet.• Allocate new mail groups for MS Ericsson teams under Ooredoo domain if applicable.Security• Inspect existing and new Premises (that Ooredoo shall provide) and secure that Ericsson safety regulations are met or implemented.• Data integrity/security.• Access and control requirements.• Data ownership.• Update the security plan and get it approved.(vi) Transition Key Success FactorEricsson believes that it is necessary to keep in mind the following Key Success Factors, based on our global experience, when establishing acceptance criteria for Ooredoo transition:• Extensive and detailed planning.• Based on best practice templates and experience, tailored to specific local transition requirements.• Early start of joint project planning process (ahead of Contract Start);• In-depth understanding of transition organization beforehand prevents surprises.• Mirrored Program/Project Organizations on both sides.• Sub-project and Overall Transition Program levels need reciprocal contact.• Highly experienced Program Managers on both sides.• One Team approach.• Close liaison and co-operation between joint project teams key to quick resolution of issues and ultimate project success.• Realistic Time Scales.• Dedicated Communications resource.• High visibility to Senior Management from Day 1.• IS/IT is a key area, due to the technicalities and complexities of modern IT networks.• Enough staff consultation time for risks and issues.Upfront identification of clearly defined KPI’s that reflect the business priorities provides focus and guides prioritization of transition workflow.Expected from Ooredoo during TransitionTo ensure a successful transition, it is important that Ooredoo mirrors the Ericsson’s transition project organization. This for each sub-project manager has a direct, authorized, and competent counterpart to run Ooredoo ’s part of the transition.Ooredoo ’s active participation in transition governance, planning, set-up, and execution is a key requisite for a successful transition. Ericsson suggests that Ooredoo performs the following actions:• Establish a transition project team as a mirror of the Ericsson team with adequate knowledge & competence to perform tasks.• Participate in communication activities according to the project scope.• Secure participation of the same key persons during the whole transition project execution.• Involve appropriately empowered people in the joint steering group.To guarantee a seamless and successful transition of the operations, Ericsson shall:• Lead the transition project according to functions and organization.• Deliver according to contracted time plan, terms and conditions.• Set up a transition project organization with adequate knowledge & competence.• Secure participation of same key personal during the whole transition project.(vii) Transition Project lead timeThe Transition project will comprise of several phases and sub-projects, which should account for the handover time lines from the project team to the Manage Service Organization, as depicted in the high-level time plan below.In addition to 1 month preparation phase after contract signature before transition period, Ericsson is requiring 1 more month to have detailed tools DD, tools connectivity setup etc. to meet basic tools deployment timelines in 3 months transition period. Figure 116 - high level Transition planAfter the initial Transition a never-ending agile process of continuous improvement will follow.   Delivery ReadinessThe Delivery Readiness activities are broken down into sub-activities:• Resource readinesso Resource ramp upo Knowledge transfer and engagemento Operational Responsibility Handover• Technical Network Knowledge Transfero KPI and Operation Performanceo Network Documentationo Network information gathering & BoQ verification o Field level verificationo Optimization verificationo Customer support handlingo Spare part handlingo Knowledge acquisition and preparation(viii) Transition Responsibility MatrixPre- Transition Initial Setup Phase#Deliverables / MilestoneOoredooEricssonPlanned start dateTools Detailed Analysis / DDSRT0 - 60 daysPre- requisites, Foundation data and dependencies of each toolSRT0 – 55 daysOrder Tools connectivity (Primary and Secondary VPN over Internet) SRT0 – 55 daysInitiate the process for VPN over internet connection using Ooredoo internet connectivity as work around solution by the time, MSP connectivity is establishedRRT0 - 40 daysTable 14: Transition Set upTransition Planning Milestones#Deliverables / MilestoneOoredooEricssonPlanned ready dateIdentify and plan all Transition activities required to establish an environment where Ericsson can perform agreed services for Ooredoo.SRT0 - 27 daysEstablish Ooredoo part of Joint steering group.RT0 - 25 daysEstablish Ooredoo part of Transition team including identification and key persons.RT0 - 22 daysPerform a risk assessment and plan precautionary actions.SRT0 -17 daysFinalize a communication plan, appoint spokespersons.RST0 -15 daysCommunicate the intention of the transition to relevant parties and stakeholders, both internally in Ooredoo and externally.RST0 -15 daysObtain approval from the joint steering group to set-up of the joint Transition project (plans and staffing of project).SRT0 -7 days12Tools Detailed analysis and Foundation Data completed SRT0 - 7 days13Establish temporary Ooredoo internet connectivity needed for tools deployment established RRT0 - 7 daysTable 15: Transition PlanningTransition Execution Milestones#Deliverables / MilestoneOoredooEricssonPlanned ready date14Key MS resources on board. RT0+ 8 days15Responsible persons in interfacing organization identified on Ooredoo sideRT0 + 8 days16Ericsson SME onsite collecting dataRST0+10 days17Provide Ericsson accesses to relevant Ooredoo operation data and tools.RT0 + 20 days18Make available and secure access to Objects of Service.RT0 + 20 days19Make available and secure access to relevant / required Ooredoo information.RT0 + 25 days20Ooredoo to serve termination notice/Request local staff transfer to Ericsson whatever is applicable.RT0+28 days21Ooredoo premises readinessRT0 + 30 days22Establish an escalation procedure; both technical and management escalations.SRT0 + 30 days23Integrate Ericsson’s operational processes into the existing operational processesSRT0 + 50 days24Existing personnel offer handover on Tell Day if applicable.RT0 + 55 days25Provide and / or restrict Ooredoo/MSP accesses to Ericsson processes, data and tools.RT0 + 60 days26Implement processes for management of assigned contracts, Ooredoo third party contracts and other contracts.SRT0 + 60 days27Establish the Ericsson Managed Services OrganizationsSRT0 + 60 days28Implement responsibility matrix on Ericsson side.SRT0 + 60 days29Implement responsibility matrix on Ooredoo and/or MSP supplier.RST0 + 60 days30Start Shadowing activities with Staff at NOC premises. & identify resource gapsRRT0 + 60 days31Establish Working Level Agreements between Ericsson and Ooredoo (operational and Demand Organization).SRT0 + 60 days32Start Reverse Shadowing with existing NOC resourcesRRT0 + 75 days33Establish Basic Tools SRT0 + 80 days34Obtain approval from the Joint steering group that everything has been transferred as agreed in writing among the Parties.ART0 + 80 days35Restrict accesses to Ooredoo operation data and tools for outgoing organization.RT0 + 85 days36Complete transfer of Scope of Work (SoW) from Ooredoo to Ericsson on Service Commencement Date.RST0 + 90/105 days37Close the Transition project organization.SRT0 + 110 days 		                                       Table 16: Transition Execution(ix) Contract Change Control ProcessChange Control ProcedureDuring the Managed Shervice Delivery, any changes applied to Ooredoo’s networks and services that affect the MS delivery, will be agreed between Ooredoo and Ericsson in accordance with the Change Control Procedures set out in the Managed Services Agreement. The process ensures that every change in the network is handled in a controlled way, while maintaining the quality of the network/services and minimizes the effect of any disturbance.During the establishment phase any changes to the outlined service scope and or the establishment project itself will be managed through the establishment project management change control.Any changes to the overall agreement or to the appendices hereto, will be agreed between the Parties in accordance with the procedures set out below. The manner of change will depend on the issue that is proposed to be changed.Ooredoo’s Request for ChangeIn the event Ooredoo wishes to make a Change, it shall notify Ericsson in writing specifying the Change in reasonable detail. The notification shall be made to the Relevant Governance Body.• Ericsson shall within 15 Business Days respond to Ooredoo, (if, due to the complexity of the requirement, the preparation will take longer than 15 Business Days, Ericsson will within five Business Days of receipt of notification advise Ooredoo of the number of Business Days required for this), with a copy to the Relevant Governance Body, and shall set outi. the technical and operational consequences (including without limitation technical and operational feasibility) of the Change,ii. the effect (if any) on Service Levels and/or KPIs,iii. the cost impact (including any adjustments to the Service Charges),iv. a plan for implementation of the requested Change, andv. other required changes to the overall agreement by reason of the Change.• The requested Change and Ericsson’s response shall be discussed at the next meeting of the Relevant Governance Body within a maximum of 15 Business Days from the receipt of Ericsson’s response.• In the event Ericsson has responded that the Change can be implemented, Ooredoo shall within 15 Business Days after the receipt of Ericsson’s response (but not prior to the discussion within the Relevant Governance Body) decide whether the Change shall be implemented, and, if so, the Parties shall take, and cause to be taken, all necessary actions (including documenting the Change) in order to implement the Change, including the execution of an amendment to the overall agreement, if applicable. No Change may be implemented without a written Change note signed by both Parties.Ericsson’s Request for Change• In the event Ericsson wishes to make a Change, it shall notify Ooredoo in writing specifying the Change in reasonable detail, the cost impact, the technical consequences, and any other known consequence expected to be of interest to Ooredoo. The notification shall be made to the Relevant Governance Body.• The Change request shall be discussed at the next Relevant Governance Body meeting within 15 Business Days and the Relevant Governance Body shall determine whether the Change is approved.• Upon approval, the Parties shall take, and cause to happen, all necessary actions (including documenting the Change) to implement the Change, including the execution of an amendment to the overall agreement, if applicable. No Change may be implemented without a written confirmation signed by both Parties.Fast Track Changes• In the event of an immediate need arising for making a change to the overall agreement (or any of its appendices) and in the event a delay of a decision would be likely to cause, in either Party’s reasonable opinion, severe damage to property or cause severe interruption of the Services or interruption of Ooredoo’s business or Ericsson’s business, then Ooredoo may make a request for a Fast Track Change to the Relevant Governance Body and the Relevant Governance Body shall promptly decide on the matter. The Fast Track Change request shall contain, among other things, the reasons for the request, the objectives of such request and a target timetable for implementing such objectives. If it is necessary to implement any such Fast Track before it is possible to convene a meeting of the Relevant Governance Body, the Parties shall ensure that an extraordinary meeting of the Relevant Governance Body is convened as soon as necessary after implementation of the Fast Track Change.• Ericsson shall not have any liability for failures to meet agreed KPI’s or Service Levels or other failure to perform under the overall agreement because of a Fast Track Change Request. Unless the fast track changed agreed upon as a normal activity that was rescheduled to solve a potential problem, or associated with VIP and or upcoming activity i.e., not all fast-tracked changes are involving risk and thus shall be treated from that prospective as a normal activity with Ericsson full liability for any failure.(x) Transition Out at end of contractAt the termination of the Managed Services contract, Ericsson will run a structured and integrated Transition-Out Project to ensure graceful transfer of the full operations back to OoredooIt is important to note that the success of such a project is depended on both parties Ooredoo and Ericsson alike. Therefore, support from Ooredoo is imperative for the successful handover of operations. Systematic high-level Transition-out approach.• Ooredoo will formally notify Ericsson about a contract termination three months in advance.• A relevant Non-Disclosures Agreements to be signed-off between both parties.• Transition-Out governance and steering committee to be established.• Ericsson to define and share a Transition-Out plan and handover criteria with Ooredoo.• The required Transition-Out sub-project streams will be defined in the planning phase.• Ooredoo and Ericsson to nominate Transition-Out Projects SPOCs.• Ooredoo will put an internal operational organization ramp plan in place.• Ooredoo to complete operational organizational ramp-up before the start of the Transition-Out Project • Ericsson to initiate Transition-Out Project 3 months’ prior contract termination.• SPOCs and team members from both Ericsson and Ooredoo to be introduced and handshake responsibilities.• Weekly Steering meetings to be conducted to monitor the progress.• Issues and delays to be highlighted in the weekly steering committee meeting.• Ericsson to conduct closed session with Ooredoo nominated SPOCs and team leads to share all needed critical information.• Transition-Out project towards Ooredoo will focus on handover of, Network nodes information, Operations procedures and Assets as applicable.• Ericsson teams to share network information with SPOCs, who then will share it with respective internal teams.• Ericsson will conduct one technical session for each function and domain based on Train the trainer concept.• Hanover of information and responsibilities to be signed of between Managers from both parties.• Handover of Operations responsibilities to occur based on Functions.(xi) Tools SetupI.1 MSDP Tool SuiteEricsson will deploy its global tools suite Managed Services Delivery Platform (MSDP) and serve end-to-end management of networks in multi-vendor, multi-technology, and multi-country environment, enabling efficient alarm monitoring, trouble shooting, fault restoration, work order distribution and reporting. High Level Solution DescriptionMSDP Tools and components which are part of the scope for Ooredoo MSDP Solution are listed below:Sr. No.Tools NameVendorHigh Level Description1InSiteEricsson ML/AI Platform2NPS Insight Net Promoter Score Insight3EIO Energy Infrastructure Operation4CSW Optimization Cognitive Software5BPMS Business Process Management System6MATE Automation Engine7ENABLE Automation Engine – RBA8RPARobotic Process Automation9IAMIdentity and Access Management10NG-RVA Analytic Platform and Visualization11OneFM Umbrella Fault Management System12MITO Management of IT Operations / Infra13ITSM IT Service Management14WFM Work Force Management15EAI Network Inventory Management16BI Centralized Reporting17IVRIn-HouseIVR (Auto Dialer) Solution for Field18SCPService Credit Portal19PM3PP Umbrella Performance Management20CM Umbrella Configuration Management21SPMS Spare Parts Management System22CEM Customer Experience ManagementHW cost for on Premises deployment is not considered for MITO (Monitoring System for IN/Charging and NFVI Infra nodes/applications) tool due to limitation of Ericsson important licenses in these countries.It is assumed that Ooredoo’s local HW / virtual environment will be used for these tools.MITO HW RequirementTotal for 1.9VMs – COREVMs - Proxy Per OpcoIP addressesShared StorageVM Count18VM Count5Mito Core21TypeNFSCPUs140CPUs20Mito Proxy per Opco7Size [GB]2500RAM [GB]640RAM [GB]64Disk [GB]13600Disk [GB]3000OS<RHEL7.9OS<RHEL7.9				MITO HW Requirement I.2 High Level Tools Description[1] OneFM (Fault Management)OneFM is a centralized system which supports Fault Management processes (as defined by eTOM) or Event Management process (as defined by ITIL/MSTOP). The OneFM solution component within MSDP solution is depicted below.                  Figure 117 -One FM ArchitectureOneFM within the Ericsson tools’ suite is acting as an umbrella system, to which all Element Managers of multiple types and vendors (or Network Elements directly) send their alarms and events. It provides a common platform to NOC users to assure resources and services and take necessary actions proactively. OneFM tracks alarm/ event information in a high-performance, in-memory database, and presents information of interest to specific users through filters and views that can be configured individually. OneFM has automation functions that can perform intelligent processing on managed information. OneFM delivers real-time, centralized monitoring of complex networks and IT domains. Collected information can then be:• Assigned to NOC users. • Passed to ITSM system.• Passed to WFM IFS system as Work Orders • Logged in historical database. • Used to trigger automatic responses to certain alarms/ eventsMain features: • Unified alarm handling • Automatic/Semi-Automatic & Manual TT creation • Alarm filtering, consolidation, summarizing & synchronization. • Alarm enrichment from NIM system • Rules-based correlation (e.g., problem-resolution, de-duplication, time based: X in Y, Hide for X) • Alarm History • End-to-End connection supervision (EMS <-> OneFM) • Alarm Synchronization[2] ITSMNG ITSM handles Incident Request, Problem Request, Change Request, Task Requests, Work Orders. NG ITSM supports all stages in the problem handling process from receiving an Incident, initiating resolution actions, and resolution progress tracking, to planning actions to secure future stability of the service. NG ITSM Runs on BMC Remedy ARS platform latest version 18.05 and is hosted on a private off-prim Cloud (from IBM). It provides OOTB ITIL service support functionality with minimal customizations and maximum configurations.NG ITSM Modules • Incident Management (IM) • Problem Management (PM) • Change Management (CM) • Asset Management / CMDB • Service Level Management (SLM) • Smart Reporting • Knowledge Management (KM) • Smart IT (Mobile App) • Service Request Management (SRM) / Work Order Module[3] WFM-IFS (Work Force Management- Industrial Finance and Services)WFM-IFS is the next generation tool for field operation which provides intelligent scheduling functionality to improve the efficiency of field force.It schedules intelligently and dispatches efficiently including figuring out which field technicians are best suited for the task based on a combination of expertise, location, and availability and equipment.				Figure 118 -WFM-IFS ArchitectureFSM – Field Service Management • Service request management module• One stop views for configured metrics via lobbies• Enriched web-based interface for easy search/navigation of required dataPSO – Planning Scheduling and Optimization• Scheduling client of IFS• Monitor, Manage & Interact with scheduling system• Plan resource utilizationFSM Mobile App• Live tracking of FT’s location as per Security’s standards• Mobile application for Field Engineers[4] NIM/EAIEricsson Adaptive Inventory (EAI) is a comprehensive Service Resource Management (SRM) platform that stores and customizes all the physical and logical resources a Communications Service Provider (CSP) needs to manage its network and services.EAI sends detailed inventory data to One FM, ITSM and WFM systems which helps them to perform alarm & Trouble Ticket correlations and root cause analysis.				Figure 119 -NIM-EAI Architecture[5] BIThe Business Intelligence and Analytics solution supports reporting, visualization and analysis of Operational Efficiency and Contract Fulfilment for customers integrated in MSDP. The MSDP BI & Analytics solution is mainly intended for Ericsson personnel to report and analyze MS operations data from the MSDP Tools. The MSDP tools currently integrated with BI & Analytics are FM, TM, NIM and WFM.[6] NGRVA (Tableau)NG-RVA (Next Generation – Reporting Visualization & Analytics) Solution is a platform for providing the dashboarding, reporting and analytical capabilities.Next Generation Visualization tool (Tableau) is to provide information to both operations and the business for informed decisions to be made by establishment of standardized procedures for the handling of MS Delivery Visualization/Indicator requests. [7] EnableAutomation involves machines executing key repetitive NOC activities through simple automation engine workflow base scripting. This capability is now evolving from simple task automation to orchestrating E2E business processes, from incident detection to resolution, including smart dispatch of work orders.Ericsson has several tools that allow automation (Automation Engine) tasks and actions usually done by engineers, but also having the capabilities to make complex correlation and alarm enrichment. This allows a more accurate and faster diagnosis when alarm occurs, and when a solution is known to apply it automatically without human intervention.[8] MATEMATE is e2e automation solution with drag and drop interface, offered as part of MSDP suite, which allows anyone in NOC to build their own automation or reuse from a very large library (1000+). Its scalability allows activating full scope automation even for largest MS customers. Through reach portfolio of building blocks even very complex automation cases can be made without programming skills. It can connect and automate commands handling to a large portfolio of customer Telco and IT devices. MATE can be used now in predictive use cases through recently developed integration with R based machine learning models. The entire development following Agile/Scrum best practice is supporting highest Security demands which have been proven by ISO 27 000 certificate.[9] RPARobotic Process Automation refers to automations where computer software drives existing enterprise application software in the same way that a user does. This means that unlike traditional application software, Robotic Automation is a tool or platform that operates and orchestrates other application software through the existing application's user interface and in this sense, is not "integrated".[10] InsiteInSite is an implementation of Intelligent Network Operations, including both telecom and IT networks. It based on application of Machine Learning (ML) algorithms and Machine Intelligence. InSite collects data from customer networks and adds additional data from external sources to provide a rich resource to train models. Then, the trained ML model uses live data and predicts potential incidents, KPI/SLA degradations, identify unnecessary field operations and site visits, or detects anomalies that otherwise could remain unnoticed. For each of its use cases, InSite identifies the root causes of predicted or detected incidents and degradations. Finally, InSite provides recommendations to the automation platform so that remedial action can be taken before the event occurs. The performance of deployed models is continuously monitored, and a feedback of prediction accuracy is gathered for further models’ improvement.  The predictive approach offered by InSite allows to focus on data driven actions as opposed to being reactive based on incidents that have already occurred. All these result in increase of the efficiency of the NOC in managed service engagements, reduction of network faults, improvement in network performance and customer experience. [11] IAMThe proposed solution relies on the Gartner Magic Quadrant leading BeyondTrust Privileged Account and Access Management solution which consists of redundant BeyondTrust appliances with MSSQL & Break glass server.Beyond InsightBeyond Insight management console is the tool for configuring managed user accounts, managed assets, customers, functions, and policies. In the Ericsson IAM project scope, it provides management functions, report generation, and access to forensic logs.[12] MITO Solution (For IGN & NFVI nodes)Functionally MITO is a multi-tier application divided in multiple layers: • Presentation Layer: A Content Management Portal to allow different functions to operate as per ITIL processes.  • Integration Layer: A platform to exchange and orchestrate data between multiple modules of MITO.• Persistence Layer: Database schema used by MITO components.  • Managed IT Environments: customer network environment to manage using MITO.				Figure 120 - MITO ArchitectureMITO will collect data from Ooredoo’s in-scope Applications and Infrastructure integrating via standard exposed NBI’s like SNMP, Log files etc... From deployment architecture perspective, MITO will be divided into three different layers:• Centralized Server: Is an Umbrella System configured in High Availability and High Reliability, it collects all data received from proxies and present those data to users via an integrate dashboard. • Aggregation Layer: This layer is composed of Proxy servers that receive all operational data from customer’s applications and infrastructure and sends data to a Centralize Server. • Agent Layer: Agent layer consist of probes deployed on customer’s applications and infrastructure that detect and sends relevant events, counters and metrics to Proxy Servers, and also will execute command line-based checks.MITO (Management of IT Operations) is an open platform with a core of powerful tools functions. It is Ericsson’s MS IT Operations Complete Service Management and Automation Tools Framework.  Its focus is the integrated management of IT environments – from hardware through middleware up to the application layer.Ooredoo Scope for MITOMITO Tools Solution, Automation and AI for Ooredoo 3 Opcos Kuwait, Oman & Qatar -• Event Management • Performance Management • MITO Integration with OneFM for rest of the ticket lifecycle• MITO Automation• MITO.AI				Figure 120 - MITO - MSDP Connectivity[13] BPMSBusiness Process Management System is a common integration platform to be used for information flows between one system and to / from another system. Based on the Process defined inside BPMS different interfaces can be run independently and automatically to reduce Human effort, increase efficiency of the E2E business by continuously analyzing the scope for optimization of the business model to reduce lead time but by providing quality delivery.[14] Umbrella Configuration ManagementThe Primary Features and Functionalities of Network Configuration Management are as follows:  • Configuratión Summary • Device Configuration Management • Maintain the Current and Previous Network Configurations • Real Time Configuration Change Tracking • Configuration Versioning and Comparison (Configuration Drift) The Network Configuration Management enables to view the Configuration of Network Elements that are discovered through the EMS Systems.  The NCM allows to categorize the Network Elements based on the Domain Types and further allows to select the Network Elements based on which the Attributes shall be shown. Network Configuration Management empowers network service providers to automate network provisioning across all the domains of the network. Note that only the Radio domain is part of the current scope/deliverables. Configuration Management Implementation services for other domains like Core and Transmission domains are out of the scope. Network Configuration Management (NCM) is completely integrated with Network Inventory Management System (NIMS), which allows the configuration and inventory loop to be closed and automated the complete end to end fulfilment process. Auto-discovery process allows for live network provisioning based on the latest and real time network inventory. It is a multi-vendor and multi-domain configuration platform which enables network resources across multiple vendors and domains to be managed. It supports both mobile network as well as fixed network configuration management in a single unified solution thus eliminating siloed solution approach. Network Configuration Management utilizes multiple protocols to implement changes directly to the network resources. It uses command line interface (CLI) or SNMP. In case of existing NBI Interfaces are already available, the solution can leverage REST APIs or CORBA Interfaces.  NCM provides an in-built change management function wherein all the changes are recorded and stored. This allows in seamless troubleshooting. Every network change is recorded with all details available on demand.  [15] Umbrella Performance ManagementIntroducing a Comprehensive Performance Management System for Analyzing Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) Across Diverse Network Domains and Technologies:Centralized Performance Management system provides a robust framework for evaluating KPI performance metrics across a multitude of domains and technologies within the network. It facilitates both node-wise and network-wise analysis of performance data.Real-time insights into KPI trends are readily accessible, allowing for meticulous pattern analysis. Leveraging the Performance Assurance tool, enables meticulous traffic monitoring of devices.Data aggregation occurs seamlessly through the integration of data from EMS/NMS or Network Elements, at various granularity levels. Subsequently, actionable alerts are generated in response to pre-defined thresholds or anomalies, seamlessly transmitted through channels such as email or SMS.solution is equipped with flexible viewing options. Users can toggle between a holistic network perspective and a region-based comparison view. It possesses the ability to scrutinize Network Element trends, effectively identifying quality of service deterioration across interconnected Mobile Network Operators and various technologies spanning 2G, 3G, 4G, and 5G.Automatic KPI monitoring is intrinsic to our system, complete with the ability to set predetermined alert conditions. Timely notifications are dispatched when trigger values are exceeded. Furthermore, automated reports are generated periodically and disseminated to pertinent departments.User-centric approach extends to customizable dashboards. Users can seamlessly create distinct dashboards as discrete modules. Input parameters like dashboard name and widget properties are specified, while the option for multi-condition comparative analysis is at the user's disposal.The routine collection of performance counters and measurements is seamlessly executed. This is achieved through integration with existing systems or direct collection from OSS or Network Nodes via Data Collection feature. The tool inherently assesses counters across diverse domains and vendors, offering insights into performance aspects. Should KPI degradation occur, system pinpoints potential failure triggers and suggests relevant remediation strategies.					Figure 121 -OptigGo FeatureFeatures:• Data Collection• Data Delays and Incompleteness• Advanced Data Analysis Capabilities• Empowering KPI Customization through Flexible Formula Builder• Network Performance Trend Analysis• Report Builder• Health Check Tools – Parameters/Feature Audit Tools[16] Spare Parts Management SystemSPMS handles all access needs resulted from complex cooperation mode (Ericsson office, Ericsson field, ASP, DSP etc.) keeping security requirements:• Advanced graphical interface for daily usage within Ericsson network• Worldwide WEB Access for Field Engineer (Ericsson/non-Ericsson)• Access via mobile phone (Smartphone or „standard” phone)The application provide email as well as FTP interface; can be easy integrated towards L2 warehouse like customer’s spare parts warehouse or any other integration method• The application is based on master data -> can be flexibly adjusted to specific customer needs and terms of contract (SLA)• Provides flexibility, while keeping internal standardization of the process• Supports handling of contracts with short SLA by online flow of information and transparency of stock / serial numbers• Supports customer with assets management / spare parts monitoring Customer expects transparency of monitoring activities performed on their network• Multiple process flow variants are supported, to enable both simple repair for standard support contract and advanced swap / buffer tracking functionalities for complex contracts, reverse flows etc.• Optimization of stock levels by online control over all buffers used in customer contract.[17] IVR (Auto Caller) Solution for FieldAuto Caller is a home grown, cloud native notification solution meant to consume incidents from variety of sources and dispatch them to respective stakeholders through channels like automated voice calls, MS teams chats, SMSes and email. The solution supports multitenancy and allows for rapid onboarding of multiple accounts supporting account specific notification requirements.(xii) Tools Deployment ApproachTo deploy basic/mandatory tools for 3 months transition period for smooth operation after Service Commencement Date (SCD), Ericsson will follow the below approach.Pre-Transition Initial Setup Phase (2 Months)Detailed Tools DD/analysis will be initiated two months before transition period to ensure basic tools deployment before Service Commencement Date.• Tools Detailed Analysis• Pre- requisites, Foundation data and dependencies of each tool.• Tools Connectivity Order and Work around solution.Ericsson Proposes Redundant links for remote MSDP connectivity in order for Global NOC team to access Ooredoo’s Network.• Primary Link: VPN over Internet• Back-up Link: VPN over InternetAs the timelines to deploy above links are 3-4 months which will delay the project timelines, therefore as work around solution, Ericsson will use Ooredoo’s internet connectivity (2-4 Mbps) during tools deployment in the transition period by the time, Ericsson links are ready.(xiii) High Level Transformation Time Plan				Figure 122 - High level transformation planSupport Needed from OoredooTo meet the above transition and transformation plan on time, the following support would be required from Ooredoo and its existing network vendors/ 3PP partners –• Provide the IP address, ports, and relevant details for EMS/ NE, to configure probes to make a connection.• NBI account creation (username, passwords) for the interface wherever applicable• Availability of Customer representatives for clarifications if required. • EMS readiness for integration – lack of EMS readiness could postpone implementation start• Provisioning of NBI licenses for all EMS’s and Nodes• Opening network connectivity from EMS towards Ericsson's network so that all alarms are sent to Ericsson’s probe servers.• A dedicated SPOC would be assigned by Ooredoo during the transition phase to support EMS integrations.(xiv) Ericsson Tools Access to Ooredoo UsersRead Only access can be provided for ITSM, WFM, BI, NG-RVA, InSite, NPS, Cognitive Software, EIO, SPMS, CEM, PM, CM & SCP Tools. For OneFM, MITO, standard/customized reports can be shared on daily/weekly/ monthly basis and on demand via BI Tool and Tableau Dashboard. It is not applicable for Mate, Enable, RPA, BPMS, IAM and EAI tools being automation platforms, user access management and others etc.Please refer to below table for more details.Sr. No.Tools NameLayerHigh Level DescriptionEricsson Proposal1InSiteCognitive Layer ML/AI Platform- InSite User Interface i.e.: Dashboard, Map view and Reports2NPS InsightCognitive Layer Net Promoter Score Insight- NPS Insight User Interface i.e.: Dashboard, Map view and Reports3EIOCognitive Layer Energy Infrastructure Operation- EIO User Interface i.e.: Dashboard, Map view and Reports4CSWCognitive Layer Optimization Cognitive Software- User level access can be granted; however, exceptions lie with Capacity planning and RF Planning.- Can accommodate 3 users for Ooredoo staff only (one user per opco) to access the CSW.5BPMSCognitive Layer Business Process Management System- Not applicable, the engine running in the background6MATEAutomation Layer Automation Engine- Not applicable, the engine running in the background7ENABLEAutomation Layer Automation Engine – RBA- Not applicable, the engine running in the background, Output of some use cases can be shared8RPAAutomation LayerRobotic Process Automation- Not applicable, the engine running in the background9IAMSecurity LayerIdentity and Access Management- Not applicable, this tool is used for Access Management10NG-RVAAnalytic Layer Analytic Platform and Visualization - NG-RVA Dashboard and Reports can be shared11OneFMProcess Layer Umbrella Fault Management System - Alarm dump and Alarm Reports can be shared via BI Tool and NG-RVA Dashboard.12MITOProcess Layer Management of IT Operations / Infra13ITSMProcess Layer IT Service Management- User level access can be granted14WFMProcess Layer Work Force Management- User level access can be granted15EAIProcess Layer Network Inventory Management - Inventory dump can be shared on regular basis16BIProcess Layer Centralized Reporting- Regular BI reports can be shared via email17PMProcess Layer Umbrella Performance Management- User level access can be granted18CMProcess Layer Umbrella Configuration Management - User level access can be granted19SPMSProcess Layer Spare Parts Management System- User level access can be granted20CEMProcess Layer Customer Experience Management- User level access can be granted21IVRProcess LayerIVR (Auto Dialer) Solution for Field- Not Application as it is Auto Dialer Solution22SCPProcess LayerService Credit Portal- User level access can be granted(xv) Technical SpecificationCategoryNumberCommentsOoredoo Access to Ericsson Tools30 Users per OpcoTotal 30 Ooredoo users can access Ericsson tools per Opco10 out of these 30 Ooredoo users can access ITSM tool per OpcoNOC ReportsStandard + 10 customized reports per OpcoStandard + 10 customized reports per OpcoITSM B2B3 B2B Integration per Opco1 B2B for Customer Care per Opco1 B2B for Customer TT Tool per Opco1 B2B for SMS Escalation notification via customer SMSC per OpcoConnection Factory10 EMS Integration per Opco 7 sources per Opco1 CEM - NPS1 CEM FM/PM -> OneFM 5 EIO-PM Tool Oman: 7 data pipelines These data pipelines are allocated to collect PM data for InSite/AIML UCsQatar: 11 data pipelinesKuwait: 11 data pipelinesConnectivity30 Mbps for Kuwait 27 Mbps for Qatar22 Mbps for OmanAIML UCsTotal 25: (18 InSite, 2 NPS, 1 EIO (Active), 3 CEM, BPMS, 1) UCs per Opco Automation (Mate/Enable/RPAApprox. 40-45 UCs per OpcoTotal 125 UCs for 3 Opcos BPMS1 UC per OpcoTotal 3 UCs for 3 OpcosDashboards and Visualization12 Dashboards per OpcoTotal 35 Dashboards for 3 OpcosAnalytic Platform15 Analytic Dashboards per OpcoTotal 45 Dashboards for 3 Opcos(xvi) GovernanceGovernance refers to the definition and application of policies and standards to ensure the required levels of authority, accountability and decision making are in place to deliver the Manages Services agreement and meet Ooredoo ’s requirements. Governance under the Ericsson Operations Engine (EOE) aims to be less about operational and tactical control and strict adherence to rules, and more about guidance and steering to ensure the strategic objectives of Ooredoo are met.Governance under the EOE is designed to minimize bureaucracy, be a positive force for good, that promotes innovation, quicker time to market and real-time decision making.Governance aims to facilitate collaboration and transparency in service delivery. Successful Governance under the EOE aims to provide empowerment in making sound business decisions at the right pace, be effective and realize value to all parties. It will improve business outcomes, supported by the Managed Services Customer Leadership Team (MSCLT) and Service Operations teams with the effective utilization of resources.Governance Interfaces between Ooredoo and EricssonThe governance interfaces between OOREDOO and Ericsson are on MSCLT level led by the MSCOO, and on the Service Operations teams level led by the Service Owners. Establishment GovernanceDuring the establishment phase a specific governance process and body will be in place. The focus is on governance regarding the Establishment regarding the Ericsson Operations Engine Managed Services set-up for Ooredoo.The Establishment phase is directly managed by the MSCLT Program Office and lead by an Establishment Program Manager. The Establishment Program Manager will be the Single Point of Contact and will report to the relevant Governance body. Other Key transition roles from Ericsson and the customer will be appointed as required.Key Deliverables: • Approved Establishment Project Plan and Organization Structure for OOREDOO and Ericsson.Key Milestones:• Establishment Project Manager appointed.• Ooredoo & Ericsson other Establishment roles appointed.Governance considers the Establishment phase as the project activity which ends with the Completion Signoff from Ooredoo, and the contract Service commencement begins.Establishment Governance forums in ascending order of precedence:• Weekly Project Review.• Fortnightly Governance Forum.• Monthly Steering Group.Three Tiers of Governance during the Operational PhaseDuring the operational phase of the EOE a 3 tiers Governance will be utilized. a. Service Operations: the major focus is an end-to-end Service approach.b. Strategy & business development: major focus is risk, relationship management and evolution of the Services.c. Executive board: major focus is outcome based & driving value creation.				Figure 123 - Governance FrameworkService Operations GovernanceService Operations Governance is the first level of governance in the steady-state (i.e., after Establishment) and focuses on end-to-end Service performance and will take place through a Service Operations board.The Service Owner is accountable for governance at this level.The Service Owner will be supported by Service Operations (Architecture, Reliability, Improvement), Automated Operations and the Technical Authority resources along with representative from Ericsson’s partner and / or supplier organization depending upon the scope of the contract.  The Service Operations board will focus on performance management of the contracted Services, including achieved agreed business outcomes between Ooredoo and Ericsson and is the forum where operational issues, risks and Service Levels and KPIs are discussed. It will review service performance and act as an escalation point.Service Operations governance is about: a. The Service Performance & Quality against the contractual commitments and business outcomes.b. Ericsson’s ability to manage security, data, risk, issues and service continuity management.c. Demand management (new requirements and readiness for new Service launches).d. Driving continuous service improvement with machine learning, artificial intelligence and automation utilizing data driven operations, as well as managing vendor/supplier performance.e. Adhering to the contract deliverables.f. Demonstrating change in mindset and behaviors and ability to innovate on behalf of OoredooOn default the Service Operations Governance will meet once a fortnight; but could meet often as agree between Ooredoo and Ericsson.Strategy & Business Development GovernanceStrategy & Business Development (SBD) is the second level of governance with major focus on service performance, strategic initiatives & evolution of the services, risks, and relationship management.The MSCLT lead by the MSCOO is accountable for governance at this level.MSCLT / MSCOO will be supported by the Service Owners along with Service Operations, Architecture, Reliability & Improvement. Automated Operations, the Technical Authority, and representatives from Ericsson’s partner and / or supplier organization depending upon the scope of the contract may also be invited to governance meetings on a need basis, but participation is not mandatory. SBD Governance is about:a. The Service Performance against OOREDOO ’s overall business objectives and outcomes as per the Managed Service Agreement.b. Assessment and joint management of Strategic Risks with appropriate mitigation.c. The introduction of new Services and end-customer launch programs.d. Collaboration and progress on Strategic Initiatives.On default the Strategy & Business Development Governance will meet once a month; but could meet often as agree between OOREDOO and Ericsson.Executive Board GovernanceThe Executive Board Governance is focusing on business outcomes and about driving value creation.The Executive board consists of senior executives from Ooredoo and Ericsson with the objective to provide Governance and oversight at the most senior level. It will discuss and agree upon general strategic activities relating to the cooperation under the Managed Services agreement including executive review of the Ericsson’s performance and review of strategic level initiatives.The focus is not primarily about managing delivery performance escalations and demand handling. Instead, it is about strategic intent and developing a strong long-term positive relationship with the customer.Main topics:a. Outcome and Value Creation, sharing new proposals with Ooredoo.b. Strategic initiatives and risks, managing security, data, issues and service continuity management, update on progress of outstanding topics.c. Shared Business Strategy - giving tangible feedback on shared initiatives against Ooredoo’s business objectives linked to:EOE Roadmap, ML & AI, Automation & Innovation, what does it mean for Ooredoo, driving continuous service improvement utilizing data driven operations.d. Initiating a mindset and behaviors to support a data driven operations approach with an innovative culture.The Executive Board Governance will happen on a ‘need’ basis only.
V. HypothesisListed below is accountability of delivery model components which form the basis of Ericsson proposal:  • Ooredoo will be responsible for Customer Call Centre and Service Desk• Ericsson will be responsible for Level-1 (Automated Operations), Level-2 Operations (Technical Authority) for Network nodes mentioned in the scope • A Dedicated Management team – also referred to as the MSCLT (‘Managed Services Customer Leadership Team) will be formed in each Opco (Kuwait, Oman & Qatar) for Ooredoo MS. It would be headed by a MSCOO (MS Chief Operating Officer) and cover governance role around Planning & Design, Program & Contract Mgmt., Operations Assurance• Respective OEM’s will be responsible for level 3 support. It is assumed that support contract between Ooredoo and all OEM’s would be in place prior to the operations transfer to Ericsson   • Ericsson will manage on behalf of Ooredoo, the Field Service partner/ 3PP vendors.  It is assumed that service contract between Ooredoo and 3PP’s would be in place prior to the service commencement date(i) General Assumptions• Ericsson's HC dimensioning is based on the information received in the RFP documents (BoQ and TT volume) and the data provided in the Q&A responses with the assumption that all the information provided are true, correct, and complete• Consolidated delivery for 3 OPCOs has been considered in the solution.• Any inclusion of new services, any alteration of scope of services, if required during the operations will be managed by Contract Change Control Process.• Reports format and frequency will be mutually discussed and agreed between both the parties.• Changes in the baseline, BOQ or SLA will require a change request as it may result in resource Dimensioning with cost impact.• Ooredoo and MSP to mutually agree on a roadmap of customer scope and use cases to be deployed over the course of the engagement.  • All AI-ML & NPS models are based on Ericsson Cloud storage.• OOREDOO will provide access to facilities (Sites, Workspace etc.)  and suitable work environment for the MS team to deliver the requested service from Ooredoo premises (for local delivery team).• Remote access (VPN) of Ooredoo Network to be provided for remote teams for delivery & transition/transformation phase.• All configuration and testing needed on Opco’s IT/Network systems shall be performed by Opco. • All required interfaces, integration points, and licenses for all EMS’s and Nodes will be made available to Ericsson for integration with the MSDP/MITO tools.• Ooredoo will facilitate and ensure that other OEM will provide full support in integrating Ericsson tools (Umbrella systems) with their 3PP EMS systems during the transition period.• OOREDOO will provide access to all the required tools to carry out operational activities• When a ticket is escalated or transferred to any 3PP after analysis, then SLA time adherence relies with the 3PP, Ericsson will coordinate end to end for rectification/ resolution.• Ooredoo shall be responsible for procuring, integration & commissioning of any new hardware/ Software, feature, service, or solution. Ericsson’s scope is to provide Managed Services as per agreed SLA/KPI and BoQ.• Ericsson will own and retain the Intellectual Property rights for Ericsson developed applications/tools/scripts for enabling/enhancing the Managed Services delivery.• CC ticket volume of FTTH and B2B customer complaints has been assumed and HC dimensioning done accordingly. Re-dimensioning of resources might be required if the actual ticket volume is not aligned with Ericsson assumptions• Request for handling any major special events where additional Monitoring, L2 support and reporting is required, will be considered as a project activity and additional efforts required to support this would be managed through a PO (Purchase Order).• Standard communication channels will be used for communication like Microsoft Teams, Outlook (email), TT, CR, Voice bridge excluding WhatsApp, Telegram & other social networking channels• Changes in SLA, SLA calculation method or change in Emergency/Critical/Major/Minor criterion & Node Count growth more than projected can result in re-dimensioning through Change Request• As part of normal operational activities, any site relocation request is assumed not more than ~1 or 2 sites subject to Force Majeure scenario's such as vandalism, burn, theft etc.• End Of Service/End of Maintenance nodes will be considered out of MS scope for Service credit calculation at start of contract or during contract duration. Best effort support to be supplied for such nodes• Discussion/Communication with remote team will be in English language.(ii) NOC Assumptions• Any inclusion of new services, any alteration of scope of services, if required during the operations will be managed by Contract Change Control Process• The 3rd party WLA’s will be in accordance with agreed SLAs for Managed Services. In the case of 3rd party, the escalation matrix should be provided with a dedicated relationship manager• Site handover to Ericsson to be implemented after integration acceptance (Free of alarm for consecutive 48 hours);• Reports format and frequency will be mutually discussed and agreed between both the parties.• SLA and KPI will not be applicable for testbed, if any.• Ericsson will Monitor capacity performance of in scope elements and will alert OOREDOO on issue related to Performance and Capacity. Any additional CAPEX required to resolve these issues will be covered by OOREDOO.• On-call support will be limited to Emergency and P1 incidents only.• Information workflow and escalation procedures will be mutually discussed and agreed between Ericsson and Ooredoo.• Remote access and login IDs for all domains & domain specific tools to be provided by Ooredoo.• SW upgrade are in scope for RAN, TXN & IP only with frequency once in a year. Updates will be done for all domains (once per year). SW patch, MOP, impact analysis will be provided by respective vendor with FNI (First Node Implementation) on at least 2 nodes of which one is most loaded/high capacity one• Site SW should be considered on minimum baseline SW level not End of Maintenance/End of Support. If running on old SW, then SW update/upgrade to baseline would not be in scope.• It is assumed that special events support is required for less than 30 days in a year. The list of non-calendar special events shall be provided at least one-month prior for readiness• No extra cost to be charged to Ericsson for NOC seats provided by Ooredoo to local Ericsson staff• Initial three months grace period post Service Commencement on SLA/ KPIs• Support contract for HW and SW should be in place before the steady state to enable achieving the agreed SLAs• It is assumed that Critical CRs will not be more than 5% of total CRs• For every new solution or design change, a KA / KT session is to be provided to Back-Office by OEM• Order Management for B2B/ B2C is limited to support FSP in case of any order failures due to network related issues(iii) Service Operation AssumptionsPrerequisite: Unless otherwise stated the following are prerequisites to the start of Solution Delivery:  • Network Cost model & supported delivery is assumed that base input will be provided by Opcos to fulfil the due analysis.• Integration to Survey result system from Opcos to the NPS Model will be supported as standard integration or provided a data export feed with FTP or some other data transfer.• Integration to CRM support to be provided by Ooredoo, needed for customer classification towards CEM & NPS to build the relevant Use case.• Ooredoo is responsible for providing the required hardware, power, networking, and infrastructure for the proposed tool solution to operate. • Enclosed is BoQ for HW & SW requirement for CEM Application, Performance Management Tool, Configuration Management Tool, Probing & Geo Location tool: Assumptions:• Recalculation/Update of the sizing for CEM/NPS tool will be done:o If there is a change of the inputs consideredo Sizing made based on NE’s derived from the cell count & quantity provided by Ooredoo.• In case of below scenarios, expected to impact the cost & request to be govern with change control procedureScenario Impact on License Impact on HW Impact on Services Upgrade of EMS NO Very limited Covered by the AMC Adding new EMS that is existing on CEM Tool adapter list As per the License Model Yes Yes (Limited) Adding new EMS that is not existing on CEM Tool adapter list As per the License Model Yes Yes (require specific customization) • CEM & Probing dimensioning is done with below traffic & User assumptions:TechnologyTraffic Input ItemTraffic Input ItemNo of xDR4G CP Traffic1191 MbpsControl Plane Probe258 MbpsControl Plane 4G/5G1044245G CP Traffic375 MbpsUser Plane Probe23 MbpsUser Plane (15% of Traffic)9000IMS SIP Traffic150 MbpsItemQatarKuwaitOman202320232023Packet Core Vendor NokiaHuaweiHuaweiIMS VendorHuaweiHuaweiHuaweiPacket Core Sites333IMS Sites222Peak Data Traffic (Gbps)400400400Numbers of active subscriber (Mn)333Numbers of 4G subscriber (Mn)222Numbers of 5G subscriber (Mn)0.20.20.2VoLTE BHCA222• Lately we have received the response from Ooredoo Oman & Ooredoo Kuwait on the above input. However due to delay input we kept the assumptions & we will calibrate with new figure in coming days.• The number and type of customers will be jointly agreed with by MSP and Ooredoo. • Data storage for maintaining record of the SCO reports should be provided by Opco. o MSP can use Opcos data lake to store the relevant data storage.• Provide historical data Network KPIs and NPS survey results for at least last 9 months for model training, this has high dependency to bring higher accuracy for AI-ML models.• Provide latest site database showing affiliation of Cells/Sites – Clusters – County – Region.• During operations phase, conduct NPS surveys in a systematic way and provide the survey results pertaining to network/technical NPS in an agreed format and frequency.  • To provide Network KPIs and survey data in prescribed format and at an agreed frequency.• Permission to host network performance data & anonymized surveys on ECE for the duration of the project.• TAC & DPI signature file will be updated regularly every 3 months).(iv) Transition Assumptions• Ooredoo to participate in and facilitate the post contract reviews and transition.• Transition project will not handle any operational activities related to Ooredoo during Transition and shall not be responsible for any KPIs breach. • Ooredoo owns all asset infrastructure, any CAPEX related investments in Ooredoo Network will continue to be borne by Ooredoo. • Ooredoo will be responsible for activities associated with its Inventory and Asset Management. • Any requests to add scope and network elements not included in the Objects of Service will invoke the Change Request Governance and Control process.• Ooredoo will facilitate knowledge transfer from its current MS service providers to Ericsson during transition; this applies both locally and remotely. (v) Tools Assumptions • Below Basic Tools deployment will be completed during Transition Period while remaining tools deployment will be completed afterwards.Sr. No.Tool NameComments1OneFMCritical EMS Integration2ITSMWithout B2B integration with Customer TT Tools3WFM 4NIM5BI / ReportingStandard BI Reports without customized reports• HW cost for on Premises deployment is not considered for MITO (Monitoring System for IN/Charging and NFVI Infra nodes/applications) tool due to limitation of Ericsson important licenses in these countries. Therefore, it is assumed that Ooredoo’s local HW / virtual environment will be used for MITO tool.• It is assumed to use Ooredoo’s internet connectivity for tools deployment during transition period as temporary workaround solution by the time, Ericsson links are deployed.• Pre- requisites, Foundation data and dependencies of each tool to be addressed during 2 months initial setup phase before transition period.• It is assumed that Ooredoo/existing MSP will provide full support in providing all needed info before and during transition period.• It is assumed that Ericsson 3rd Party tools will be transferred to Ooredoo at the end of contract as per mutual agreement between both parties.• Ooredoo is responsible for providing the hardware, power, networking, and infrastructure for the Umbrella Performance and Configuration Management tools (Refer to Annex_CEM_HW_BoQ_Tech_Specs which is inclusive of PM and CM tools). • It is assumed that total 30 Ooredoo users can have read only access to Ericsson tools per Opco. And 10 out of these 30 Ooredoo users can access ITSM tool per Opco (Please refer to sub-section (xv) Technical Specification of section E.(vi) Field (3PP, Power Operations & DC) Assumptions The following assumptions have been made:• Ericsson's solution is based on the information received in the RFP documents and the data provided in the Q&A responses, Due Diligence response with the assumption that all in the information provided are true, correct, and complete.• All field related tasks shall be executed by FSP, except data centers where MSP shall perform field / on-site tasks.• For Schedule 15 & Schedule 16, Ericsson fully compliance statements to be read together with these remarks: “Ericsson assumes that Ooredoo has adequate enforcement under their contracts with their FSP partners to secure FSP deliverables to cover all the requirements around better committed MTTR lower outages etc., to extent applicable to FSPs. Ericsson will perform the Third-Party Management, and no amount of diligence on Ericsson’s part as MSP can ensure compliance to this requirement, unless FSP delivers 100% of its scope. Ericsson will escalate where it finds any Third-Party not delivering as per their contracts with Ooredoo”. Furthermore, no technical training shall be given to FSPs; only training related to processes& tools, ways of working improvements shall be delivered to FSPs.• Ericsson's 3PP solution is synergized with NOC scope. • A clear responsibility Matrix between Ooredoo, MSP & FSP shall be agreed during transition phase.• Ooredoo ensure that the FSPs/ Subcontractor Agreements in scope are valid • Ooredoo provides Ericsson with the Supplier Agreement Terms necessary for performance management.• Ooredoo pay Supplier invoices as per Ericsson reported service credits• All changes to scope will be managed through the Contractual Change Control Procedure.• BMSs on data center/Core sites are integrated with NOC and shall be monitored via NOC• SLA/KPI shall be baselined, and targets shall be mutually agreed after Stability Period• The volume & contents of reports shall be mutually agreed between Ericsson & Ooredoo during transition / contract negotiations.• Office space and warehouse on core sites shall be provided by Ooredoo.• In case sites is not accessible due to heavy rains, floods, earthquake, natural calamities, Fire, War, local unrest, curfew imposed by state / central Govt, interference through external antisocial elements, neighbors, Local Community, leading to non-meeting of SLA shall be discussed with Ooredoo on a case-by-case basis and decided accordingly.EIO solution for Power Operations• Cloud based solution to be used in all countries. • EIO Active / Predictive Cell Energy Management (PCEM) solution is proposed for RAN energy savings and three UCs are offered: Deep sleep, Cell lock/ RRU lock, Dynamic RAN Feature Configuration. Feasibility study shall be carried out to forecast RAN energy savings.  • Below are the cells – 4G & 5G- which are part of PCEM solution:  • EIO Passive solution is proposed for passive infrastructure efficiency and is offered for those sites where RSM is already installed and working• It is assumed that the same make of RSM is deployed currently on 1580 sites in all 3 OPCOs & Ericson shall deploy its NGEM solution for those sites. Passive UCs shall be deployed as per below:o Kuwait: RSM is working on 858 sites (30% of RAN Sites) and only DC system is remotely monitored. DC power related Use Cases are offered accordingly.o Oman: RSM is working on 350 RAN sites (90% Grid only, 10% Grid +DG) & hence remote monitoring is in place for AC and DC power systems. Relevant Use Cases are offered accordingly. o Qatar: RSM is working on 335 RAN sites (90% Grid only, 10% Grid + DG) & hence remote monitoring is in place for AC and DC power systems. Relevant Use Cases are offered accordingly.• Passive infra data is available at NOC/Central location• Feasibility study shall be carried out to analysis which use cases to be implemented and shall purpose savings accordingly.• Reports shall be generated in line with the offered use cases       (vii) BCP Assumptions• Ericsson assumes that Ooredoo has its corporate business continuity plan (BCP) framework, which shall be the guiding document for BCP-DR implementation on managed services operations on its multiple vendor network• Ooredoo will provide BCP compliant network and will undertake all activities under design, planning and deployment to meet the BCP-DR objectives• Ericsson shall support Ooredoo in implementation of BCP-DR processes for the contracted services and over the contracted BOQ• Ericsson shall not provide training to non-Ericsson resources on Ooredoo’s BCP-DR framework• The BCP-DR test plans, the format of reports and its frequencies shall be mutually discussed and agreed during the contract finalization phase. It is suggested that the services categorized under major concern category that might have an impact on the business shall be tested once in every six months; all other services shall be tested at least once in a year.(viii) NPO AssumptionsBelow is the list of assumptions that Ericsson built upon, its technical proposal towards OG. It is assumed that:• OG will share the detailed Bill of Quantity of all domains involved in this RFP (RAN, Transport, IP, Core) and all relevant data as requested by Ericsson part of the clarification questionnaires as part of the pre-due diligence and due diligence. This will ensure proper dimensioning of the resources and platforms for the contract duration.• Ericsson on-site Key staff will be working and located at OG offices in the Opcos. Remaining organization will be delivering remotely from offshore location.• OG will grant enough space/desk/chairs/physical access/internet connectivity to Ericsson Key staff and Ericsson Key subcontractors leads• OG will grant full right access to Ericsson staff to all its tools, probes, platforms, network management systems (from all existing OG vendors and OG suppliers) for Ericsson to properly conduct its optimization services.• OG will provide Ericsson with official letter supporting it to conduct field test services for outdoor and indoor locations in the respective countries.• OG will facilitate due diligence activities prior to contract start. The due diligence will help Ericsson better understand OG network complexity and be well prepared for the transition-in phase• OG will communicate to Ericsson optimization team ahead of time any new upcoming project and its timeline. Projects or events that might impact optimization work continuity (SW upgrades, SW updates, major nodes/services down (NOC/SOC related or beyond), nodes dismantling, technology sunset, introduction of new technologies, new bands introduction, network topology change, spectrum change, physical sites count change, power settings change, pop up projects, marketing forecast changes, new products and devices launch for OG subscribers/enterprise, new bundles launch for OG subscribers/enterprise, new service launch etc.)• OG will handshake and mutually agree with Ericsson for any projected change over service level agreements SLA and Key Performance Indicators KPI calculations.(ix) Cognitive Software Platform Assumptions• Ericsson Cognitive Radio Network Design and Optimization platform HW will be installed and integrated to OG network.• Ericsson will retain administrative rights on the physical HW and the file system exclusively. • OG must guarantee the bandwidth between ENM locations and Cognitive Software deployment for data transfer.• Cognitive Software will cover only 4G and 5G technologies as per network BOQ provided in section 5.5.3.5• 5G NSA and 5G SA deployment is assumed in this solution proposal• Direct connectivity towards the hardware will be provided using CAS connectivity. CAS is the customer access and security solution of Ericsson.  CAS is an approved way of connecting to Customer Networks (CNs) for providing remote and secure access to Ericsson delivery teams, customer support teams etc. The connectivity from ECN (Ericsson Corporate Network) to OG's Cognitive Software environment is assumed to be achieved through CAS infrastructure.• The offered software does not include any current or future release of software modules that are not explicitly mentioned in this document. • The CSW modules will be provisioned for Ericsson delivery personnel only.• In subsequent rounds of due diligence and clarifications, the adoption / rollout strategy for Cognitive Software will be finalized and documented as such.• It is assumed that the Cognitive Software environment will be deployed as a centralized multi-tenant environment for OG Opco’s (Qatar, Kuwait, Oman)• The data format from multi-Vendor would be in 3GPP specified format as per requirements to be detailed in the delivery phase.• The CSW centralized environment will be hosted in OG data center. Assuming the OG DC is in Country A, direct connectivity should be available towards OPCO ENM for Country B and Country C. The DC location and connectivity pre-requisites would be discussed during the due diligence and later LLD phase• If cloud environment is to be provisioned by OG, the cloud has to fulfil the following requirements:• All the VMs should have reserved resources as per dimensioning output without any overcommitment. i.e., Full RAM reservation, each physical CPU core = 2 vCPUs (HT enabled)• Internal dedicated 10Gbps NW between the VMs and host servers• Uplinks of sufficient BW towards OSS/ENM for data transfers.• SAN storage or DAS where disk types, combinations and RAID setups will guarantee data integrity and required IOPS performance • Max two DN VMs per physical host• CentOS 7.7 and Windows 2016 STD OS supported VMs• In case of VMware virtualization layer, we need dedicated cluster with static setup (DRS disabled).• Access to guest OS (VMs) for integration and support.• Connectivity and FW Port openings from/to CSW zone (preferably dedicated IP subnet) towards ENM/OSS/other data sources, as well as to/from CAS or other user/admin access solution and NTP server as per required communication/port matrixVI. ExclusionThis section highlights the exclusions considered by Ericsson for this Managed Services offer.(i) General:• Network & IT expansions, installation, and integration• Software and hardware upgrades • Managed services/ operations of all equipment/ service/ feature which is not part of the agreed bill of quantity (BOQ) and SOW• All consultation and communication with relevant government organizations, regulatory bodies, external parties or unions, and associated costs• Resources/services required during regulatory audits. This might include unforeseen network wide audit or testing for regulatory compliances which are not under regular operational activities• Outages/ delay/ deterioration in service due to third party reasons• Security Incident Investigations.  (Ericsson support to Ooredoo security team is limited to providing appropriates logs from the system only)• Any infrastructure enhancement or deployment• SI (System Integration) activities for new node integration and node roll out beyond the BoQ• Inter-operability testing consultancy and integration efforts• Vandalism• VNF onboarding is out of managed services scope and should be handled by the project team• New Project Implementations for Enhancement of Production Environment (Storage Migration, Server Migration, etc.…)• Product development and Product customization • New Environment Setup is excluded from MS scope• Upgrade and Migration activities will be treated as separate projects and excluded from MS scope for the IN nodes• Product Level Defect Fixing (Kernel / Level 3 support) • SLA and KPI measurement shall exclude instances with following reasons:Force Majeure, Natural CalamitiesOutages or service degradations on account of natural calamity deployment & restoration delays etc.TheftOutages or service degradations on account of theft from sites etc.Access IssueOutages or service degradations on account of access problems at site etc.Capacity BottlenecksOutages or service degradations due capacity bottleneck, insufficient licenses/resources etc.Table 19: SLA/ KPI Measurement Exclusion(ii) Core Sites:• Re-engineering / Expansions / Movements / Upgrades of network elements, facilities, Utilities, and associated infrastructure, etc. • Design Defects of products from OEM or site design dimensioning errors leading to operational efficiency or failures. • Major repairs on site• Delay on service delivery due to customer pending action shall be excluded from SLA/KPI calculations.• Filling of FM 200 gas• Tower painting• Physical sites security• Generator refueling (procurement and services)• Generator Over hauling • Spare parts• Consumables • Liaison with authorities for police reporting, insurance companies etc• Any financial payments related to any Local authority, pollution control department, PLN department, Fire department any other work and permissions• Commercial acceptance of nodes/equipment(iii) 3PP management:• Commercial responsibility of contracts between Ooredoo & FSP• Any field work required at sites• Any material required for doing O&M on sites.(iv) Power operations /Energy Infrastructure operations (EIO)• Procurement & deployment of Hardware for Passive EIO Solution• Field / onsite work related to on-site O&M • SIM arrangement, maintenance, and billing (v) Microwave Network Optimization • Full Transmission Design/Re-design.• Field activities• Force Majeure and other unforeseen events such as outages because of natural disasters etc.• Power and existing infra related issues will be excluded upon relevant reported alarms.  • Faults attributed to 3PP systems (Active or Passive Infrastructure not under Ericsson Services scope) and their performance e.g. if it is proven that an Outage is caused due to a 3PP system interface and Ericsson has undertaken all necessary actions on its end as agreed.• Service Level degradation due to proven (with clear reference) network resource congestion condition of customer dependency or 3rd Party Products HW or SW limitation(vi) IP Network Optimization • Full Design and /or Re-design activities• Force Majeure and other unforeseen events such as outages because of natural disasters etc.• Power and existing infra related issues will be excluded upon relevant reported alarms.  • Faults attributed to 3PP systems (Active or Passive Infrastructure not under Ericsson Services scope) and their performance e.g. if it is proven that an Outage is caused due to a 3PP system interface and Ericsson has undertaken all necessary actions on its end as agreed.• Service Level degradation due to proven (with clear reference) network resource congestion condition of customer dependency or 3rd Party Product HW or SW limitation.• KPI degradation caused in the IP Network due to 3PP interfaces with other network domains where Ericsson IP optimization team can clearly establish performance degradation due to 3PP performance and where Ericsson has carried out all necessary procedures and investigations• Field activities(vii) Core Network Optimization • Optimization services of any equipment, and/or services which are not part of the agreed bill of quantity (BOQ) and Scope of Work.• The NFVI handling and Optimization• Execution of Hardware network expansions, upgrades, installation, and integration• Communication with relevant government organizations, regulatory bodies, external parties, or unions• Capacity Bottlenecks, where expansions are pending• Full Design and /or Re-design activities• Troubleshooting HW logs to answer HW related tickets. This activity is usually handled by customer support teams.• New nodes connectivity or relocation design plans if related to special projects.• Providing initiatives to enhance OPEX reduction.• End user/subscriber support is assumed to be provided by the Customer Care.• Faults attributed to 3PP systems (Active or Passive Infrastructure not under Ericsson Services scope) and their performance e.g., if it is proven that an Outage is caused due to a 3PP system interface and Ericsson has undertaken all necessary actions on its end as agreed per the OLA, Ericsson shall be excused from the Service Credits.• Service Level degradation due to proven (with clear reference) network resource congestion condition of customer dependency or 3PP HW or SW limitation.• Field activities(viii) Cognitive Software Platform • Scope outside the one described in this document is excluded.• SW customizations are excluded from the scope of this solution including any integration requirements with existing OG or 3PP tools / platforms. • The Cognitive Software offering excludes any planning or design activities. Further, no Transmission, transport, Core nodes, or any other nodes outside the specified radio footprint are considered within this scope.• Some items that define the conditions under which Exemptions shall be granted for measurements that are discovered and proven to have been adversely affected include external factors, 3rd Party Equipment or Services, 3GPP Specifications, Network Traffic and Congestion, interference, rollout activities, handset performance.(ix) CEM Tool/Probing • Ericsson proposed CEM Tool application is capable to support FTTH services., provided existing probing feed to CEM from capability present to provide the required deliverables. The warranty on HW will be null & void if:• The Licensed Software and Hardware Products have been tampered with, repaired, or worked upon by unauthorized individuals or non-E/// personnel.• The Hardware Product warranty sticker has been removed.• Hardware Product case screws, other than those specified in the manual, have been removed.• Hardware Product case has been opened in a manner different from that explained in the manual.• Hardware Product equipment serial number has been altered, erased, or removed; or• The Licensed Software and Hardware Products have been misused, neglected, or damaged.
VII. RACI MatrixThis section defines the responsibility split between Ericsson and Ooredoo for this delivery - (i) Network Operations ManagementActivity/Sub-ActivityOoredooEricsson1Customer contract fulfilment managementR2Performance reportingIR3Manage operational readiness SR4Change managementR/A/SR/S5Quotation based services mean all services that are not included in the basic MS scope, but might be performed by Ericsson on Customer’s request, based on a quotation from EricssonC/AR6OSS AdministrationR7Business Continuity ManagementC/IR8Tracking of work order status and SLA/KPI fulfilment for NOC IR9Escalation in case of problems or SLA/KPI violationsS/IR10Allow Ericsson remote access to network elements in scope RTable 20: RASCI Matrix – Operations Management(ii) Fault ManagementActivity/Sub-ActivityOoredooEricsson1Fault monitoring (24x7)R2Fault handlingI/SR32nd line operation and maintenance (8x5 & On-call support) R4Emergency handling (24x7)IR5Maintenance fault management toolsR6System backupsR7Create and forward work order to field services IRTable 21: RASCI Matrix – Fault Management(iii) Configuration ManagementActivity/Sub-ActivityOoredooEricsson1Create work order for service requests originating from Customer or end customer RS/C/I2Define schedule for Work Order execution•	Changes•	Planned maintenance•	Preventive maintenanceI/S/CR3Assign execution windows to work orderI/AR4Execution of work order for system provisioningIR5Check if corresponding field maintenance / infrastructure related work order are fulfilledSR6Update of network inventoryIR7Tracking and documentation of work order executionIR8Provide legal and regulatory requirementsRI9Introduction of new node/ service/ function/ feature (Integration, commissioning, testing)RS10Testing of any platform/solution/service to be introducedRC/ITable 22: RASCI Matrix – Configuration Management(iv) Service Operations CenterThis section is provided to identify the roles and responsibilities between Ericsson and Ooredoo. It will be fine-tuned during the finalization of the actual scope of the project. In the table, for each activity is reported a role for each party according following definition: • R [Responsible]: the party who performs and completes the task. • A [Accountable]: the party who is ultimately answerable for the activity or decision. • C [Consult]: the party to be consulted prior to a final decision or action. • I [Inform]: the party to be informed after a decision or action is taken. They may be required to act because of the outcome. Activity (function) Output Ericsson  MS CEM  Opco CEM Framework Design CEM Capabilities R I Idea Collection Use Case Idea Funnel R C Use Case Definition  Prioritized List of Use Cases R C Use Case Scope Development Use Case Scope R I Sign Off Use Case Scope Signed Off C R Use Case Scope Development Use Case Readiness R I Use Case UAT & Signed Off CSP Signed Off R A Use Case Catalogue Update Use Case Catalogue R I Service Operations Governance Tracking output of the delivery R I Work Level Agreement WLA process development Defining new processes & Alignment with all party R C Service Surveillance Use Case threshold TT R I Service Analysis Use Case Analysis RCA R I Service Assurance Service incident restoration R I Service improvement Optimized Service quality R I Reporting Use case performance reports R I Table 23: RASCI Matrix – SCO Delivery The detailed WLA & OLA between different stake holders will be created during Transition phase. (v) Network Performance & OptimizationKindly refer to Ericsson statement of compliance for Network MS_Schedule 5_Network Performance and Optimization (NPO)(vi) 3PP Management ActivityEricssonOOREDOO/FSPContract with FSPsIRPO issuanceI,CRPayment to FSPsIRSites MonitoringRISupport in selection of FSPsSRFSP Performance management (Governance)RCSLA/KPI calculationRCPenalty / service credit calculation RAChronic sites analysis, reporting and drive to fix the recurring outages / issues RIQuality assurance for preventive maintenance tasksRISpare parts and consumables inventory controlRIEnsure WLAs are updated and in placeSRFSPs Ways of working improvements in line with Ericsson process RAManage contractual change handlingC, IRRe-negotiation of FSPs contractsC, IREnsure compliance with national and international laws and regulationsIREscalate FSPs issues to customerR Assist to resolve FSP issues and disputesR Table 24: RASCI Matrix – 3PP Management(vii) Core Sites Service ActivitiesResponsibilitiesRemarksCommon RequirementsOOREDOOERICSSONDesign operational proceduresARBoth parties need in-depth participation to perform these activitiesWorking Level AgreementAREstablish the governance modelAREstablish the change control procedureAREscalation of issuesSRProvide MS needed manpower, tools, and test equipmentRManage Operations personnelRProvide office space as well as room for housing spare parts / consumables on core sites needed for Ericsson governance staffRSProvide vehicles for all Operations WorkRVehicle Costs (Driver, fuel, insurance … etc.)RHealth and SafetyARPermits neededRSLiaison with authorities like Police etcRSMaintenance ActivitiesOOREDOOERICSSONProduce Work Request RDispatch function 24/7RDispatch WOs to field teamsRPerform work on siteRReport work resultARIncident reportingIRConsumablesRISpares for Telecom equipmentRCSpares for Passive equipmentRCAccess ManagementCRSecurity Guards RICorrective MaintenanceOOREDOOERICSSONProduce Trouble Ticket (TT) or Work Order (WO)RAssist with the fault identification, troubleshooting, and replacement of identified hardware faultRAssist to NOC team to test and verify that fault clearance has been achievedRAs per agreed SLARecord the reference numbers of the assets which have been received, replaced or installed during the corrective maintenance processRReport completion of work orderRTrigger further fault escalationSRPreventive MaintenanceOOREDOOERICSSONProduce Annual Preventive Maintenance PlanRPerform Preventive Maintenance for Network SitesARAs per scheduleInspection and maintenance for the hardware of network equipmentIRSolving of any problem that impacts the site functionality & performance while carrying out the PMIRReporting of PM work completionIRGenerators & refueling, and environmental equipment OOREDOOERICSSONGenerators Preventive maintenanceIRGenerators Corrective maintenanceIRFuel procurement & fueling of GeneratorsRIConsumablesRCGenerator Overhauling Service, Major repairs & ReplacementRSGenerator over hauling service shall be charged separately via change control processCM & PM of Firefighting system, IRFM 200 gas filling excluded from Ericsson scopeCM & PM of Air-condition System, Grid, Shelters, transformations, AC/DC systemsIRConsumables shall be charged separatelyPlanned WorksOOREDOOERICSSONPlanned Works Planning timeARProduce Trouble Ticket (TT) or Work Order (WO)SRDispatch WOs to field teamsIRPerform work on siteIRReport work resultARSpare parts Handling (Data Centers)OOREDOOERICSSONSpare Parts ProcurementRfor telecom and non-telecom/passive infrastructure Deliver (healthy) spares to site from warehousing pointsIRReplace faulty parts on-siteIRPick up faulty parts from sitesIRDeliver (faulty) spares to warehousing points from the siteIRPrepare faulty report for each faulty board IRInternational transportation & custom clearanceRIWarehouses at CORE sitesRSProvide a regular report of used spare partsARSpare Parts Inventory ManagementSRContacting and following up third party suppliers/vendorsSRReports and DocumentationOOREDOOERICSSONProvide daily, weekly, monthly and quarterly reports and dashboards to measure FM performance and progress ARPreventive and Corrective maintenance reportsARSpare parts inventory (stock level) reportsARTable 25: RASCI Matrix – Core Sites(viii) Power Operations / EIOActivityEricssonOOREDOO/FSPProvision of EIO cloud solution including UC (Use Cases) deployment etcRIInstallation of EIO hardware at RAN sitesSRAcceptance of EIO solution SRField operations of EIO hardware/ connectivity S,IRTable 26: RASCI Matrix – Power Operations
VIII. BCP Business Continuity Management (BCM) is a holistic management process that identifies potential threats to an organization and the impacts to business operations those threats, if realized, might cause, and which provides a framework for building organizational resilience with the capability of an effective response that safeguards the interests of its key stakeholders, reputation, brand and value-creating activities. The BCM Framework, defined by this instruction and its enclosures, is an integrated part of our Ericsson Group Management System (EGMS). It is aligned with ISO 22301 and ISO 27001 to ensure that it meets industry best practice.Our critical business processes and resources are identified through business impact analysis and risk assessments. Strategies for process recovery are defined and business continuity action plans are prepared to ensure that the commitments we have made to our customers and partners are met. The plans are continually reviewed, tested, and improved in order to ensure that they stay relevant and up to date. Both the BCM Framework, as well as compliance with this framework, are continually reviewed by Ericsson’s internal audit and security functions.Ericsson Global NOC, or GNOC connectivity to Ooredoo Network through its OSS will be reductant in connectivity. Moreover, Ericsson has globally interconnected network for accessing any OSS connected to its communication network (ECN).Figure 124 - Connectivity and Disaster Recovery PlanOur critical business processes and resources will be identified through business impact analysis and risk assessments. Strategies for process recovery will be defined and business continuity action plans will be prepared to ensure that the commitments we have made to Ooredoo, and partners are met. The plans will be continually reviewed, tested, and improved in order to ensure that they stay relevant and up to date. Both the BCM Framework, as well as compliance with this framework, will be continually reviewed by Ericsson’s internal audit and security functions.The BCM Framework is interconnected with our crisis management framework to support the business in case an interruption would escalate significantly in severity. The Framework is divided into several phases that can be seen below. The BCM cycle is recurring at minimum annually or when significant changes in organization or targets occur.Figure 125 - BCM FrameworkAll Business Continuity Plans are part of an iterative process of continual planning, testing, reviewing and improvement. Ooredoo Managed Services team shall support & participate in Business Continuity Plan, including implementing the plans adopted by Ooredoo and performing Disaster Recovery Simulations.Ericsson will produce a comprehensive business continuity and disaster recovery plan in conjunction with Ooredoo to recover revenue affecting services in the shortest time possible in the event of an unscheduled outage such as the loss of any network element for an extended time or total network damage. The initial business continuity plan will be based on the existing system architecture. Subsequent plans may be based on the provision of specific additional network components for resilience and fallback operations. (i) BCP MethodologyEricsson’s corporate directives for Business Continuity Planning (BCP) provide a proven framework, methodology and tools coupled with our best of breed experience in Business Continuity Management activities, necessary to ensure that Ooredoo’s NOC operations are protected against events that may threaten its business.A diagrammatic representation of the BCP methodology is represented below:Figure 126 - Ericsson’s Business Continuity Planning (BCP) methodologyThis BCP focuses purely on activities within Ericsson MS contract scope.Ericsson also encourages testing, regularly reviewing and updating our Business Continuity Plan to ensure that our staff is familiar with it, and that it reflects our changing business needs.There would be an overall BCP Committee headed by an Ericsson BCP Manager and involves functional heads of Operations, Marketing, Facilities, Finance, HR, KAM, Centre heads, Regional Heads and Operations heads at onsite.There would be a Ooredoo BCP Team headed by the specified Head of Operations and functional representatives of the specific centers as members. In each center there will be a cross-functional Disaster Recovery Team who will report to the Centre Level BCP Team in the event of a disaster. They will be responsible for restoration of services, damage assessment and salvage activities.(ii) Key ResponsibilitiesTeam/RoleKey ResponsibilityHead of OperationsVerify & assess the eventNotify teams & management of the eventContact Ooredoo’s Security Manager (in High-Risk Event)Declare event after consulting with managementEstablish support required from Ooredoo’s Security CoordinatorCoordinate all aspects of the local recovery, relocation, management communication & restorationContinue to obtain updates from Disaster Recovery Team Prepare & issue press releases as directed in coordination with MU corporate communication Handle all media requestsMS COONotify the Unit leads, who will notify the customer.Coordinate with HR,Communication and FinanceEnsure professional & medical needs of the project team are met.Finance DR actions across Operations, Technology & Facilities team. Coordinate with HR & respective team leads for all HR related requirements & issues, including hiringCoordinate with Finance & ITContinue to coordinate with all the teamsBCP ManagerEnsure Business Continuity Plan is available for the TeamEnsure the correct procedures are in place for BCM Incident HandlingNotify Crisis Management TeamEnsure compliance with Business Continuity Plan documentationLead the process recovery in the event of a BCM IncidentEnsure Incident Logs are recorded of the incident & that lessons are recorded for future updatesIncrease BCM Incident Management Awareness throughout the unitKAM/ Contract RepresentativeNotify CustomerEnsure plan is activated for the customer engagementContact customer, act in accordance with resource prioritizationEnsure that business critical activities are being delivered in compliance with customer agreementMaintain contact with customerEnsure normal service is reestablishedContact CustomerHR RepresentativeGather information as to nature and duration of the eventNotify team members of the eventEnsure safety of employees and of team membersContinue to obtain updates from BCP Team Employ contingency plans to deal with employee scheduling, local message support and employee claims or demandsFinance & Legal RepresentativeGather information on nature and duration of the event Notify team members of the eventEnsure safety of team membersEnsure plan is activated for recording all financial costs during the event Evaluates Legal liability and works to minimize it.Ensure all costs are being recorded with back up documentationEnsure complete financial records are available for insurance claimsIT RepresentativeObtain outage estimates & duration information.Order required equipment & servicesCoordinate installation & configurationFacilities/Admin RepresentativeObtain damage estimates & duration informationNotify team members of the eventEnsure safety of employeesPerform risk management & insurance activities Activate primary site 		Table 27: BCP Key Responsibility(iii) BCM Program ManagementThe purpose of the management process is to provide the effective and efficient management and assurance of the organizations BCM program. The key components of this activity may include:• A BCM framework organization• BCI good practice guidelines• Financial and other operational and support resources• A management information system• BCM policy compliance process - refer to Ericsson corporate Policy• BCM audit process and program• BCM assurance process and program• BCM benchmarking process and program(iv) Business Continuity Planning ProcessUnderstanding business and identifying its Mission Critical Activities, their dependencies and single points of failure is performed through two distinct but complementary processes:• Business Impact Analysis• Business Risk Assessment• BCM Strategy• Business Continuity Action Plan• Perform Business Impact AnalysisThe Business Continuity Planning Process shall be based on a Business Impact Analysis (BIA). The purpose of the Business Impact Analysis is to• Identify Service Offerings and its criticality level for all functions.• Assess the impact of incidents or disasters that result in a denial of access to systems or services.• Determine the type of fallback arrangements required in case of a disaster.• Determine the priorities and processes for recovery of critical business processes.(v) BCM StrategyBCM Strategy describes how BCM is setup within the unit, how the risks identified in the Risk Assessment are mitigated and sets the requirements for the Business Continuity measures described in the Business Continuity Action Plan (BCAP).The Strategy document shall describe the current implemented BCM strategies and any possible future BCM strategies stating WHAT has been done to reduce the likelihood of disruption and WHAT shall be done during a BCM incident to shorten the period of disruption and to limit the impact of it(vi) Business Continuity Action PlanBCAP is to specify in detail the actual steps needed to perform (put into practice) the local business continuity strategies described in the BCM Strategy document, i.e. this is  to be used when a critical process needs to be restored due to an incident concerning a critical resource/service. BCAP shall therefore provide enough information to enable all users to complete all steps needed to recover the process. The resources covered by the BCAP are typically the resources identified to have a High or Very High-risk value in the Risk Assessment(vii) Criticality of Service DisruptionThe services are classified into one of the four based on the criticality of the services disruption. They are Vital, Essential, Necessary and Desirable. While arriving at the criticality, risk factors like Personal Safety, Services Risk, Operational Risk, Revenue Risk, Liability Risk and Goodwill (Societal Risk) have been considered and individual functional groups, projects and other stakeholders have been consulted. Guidelines for identifying the services as vital, essential, necessary, or desirable is given below.	VitalAny disruption in the service that would stop the business or function would be categorized as “Vital”.Also, an update on hourly basis or compilation of recovery of each critical stage or phase of the service (Whichever is earlier) needs to be given as per the escalation process.EssentialThe criticality would be classified as ‘Essential” if the service affects business but still the base minimum activities can be carried out.The update of the recovery process can be communicated daily or stage-wise depending on the importance.NecessaryNecessary services are the ones, which if not available causes some inconveniences to the business or deliverables.The update of the recovery process can be communicated daily or stage-wise depending on the importance.DesirableAll ‘Desirable’ services will fall into the category of cosmetic services where the downtime will not affect business in anyway.The update of the recovery process can be communicated daily or stage-wise depending on the importance.Exhaustive list of likely and relevant threat/ disaster scenarios which have been thought of and the Centers / Services / Functions that could be affected have been identified.Level of ConcernFor each disaster scenario listed out, the likelihood of occurrence of the same are defined as one of the following:HighMediumLowBased on the likelihood of occurrence of the disaster and the criticality of the services affected by the disaster, the concern for a particular disaster is identified as crucial, moderate, and trivial. Based on the type of disaster, procedures for recovery are identified.Categorization of DisastersAny disaster can be classified into one of the below three categoriesCrucial DisasterA disaster would be categorized as major disaster when one of the following occursAn entire facility or a major portion of a facility is affectedMultiple facilities are affected.Any service is impacted across multiple locations.Moderate DisasterA disaster would be categorized as minor disaster when one of the following is affected. One of the services is impacted across a facility and it does not affect project workTrivial IncidentsA disaster would be categorized as trivial incident if there is negligible impact to Operations. Since this does not affect operation or delivery, this is not covered as part of this policy.(viii) BCP TriggersBCP would be triggered based on the impact of the disaster as follows:Crucial Disaster – BCP would be activated when any one of the events occur which would cause a serious impact to business services. The escalation process (Escalation for Crucial Disasters) would be followed to control the situation, initiate recovery process, and communicate to users/customers as necessary.Moderate Disaster – BCP would be activated when any one of the events which would cause minimal or no disruption to business services. The recovery process would be within the respective functional group or project group. Based on the necessity escalation chart (Escalation for Moderate Disasters) would be followed.Other than the mentioned above categories, any minor incidents that would cause potential damage to the business (if not taken care immediately) would be taken care by the respective support group persons and noted as security incidents. Following is few of the cases:• Fire spark in any of the utilities or cables• Water Leakage in Data Centre, UPS room, etc.• Fire alarm getting activated.(ix) Business Continuity Policies for the Organization• For all crucial disasters, the BCP Manager would invoke the BCP process in consultation with the BCP Team• For all moderate disasters, it is the responsibility of the functional head to invoke the BCP and inform the BCP team based on the services affected.• It is the responsibility of the BCP Team to ensure that adequate spare resources are available at the backup sites as mentioned in the functional procedures• It is mandatory that the BCP Manual distribution is done to the entire BCP team• It is mandatory for all BCP team members to maintain two copies of business continuity procedures for their respective functions in an easily accessible and secure location• A backup person shall be identified for all the BCP team members• The BCP shall be reviewed at least once every six months and updated• The BCP shall be updated whenever major additions, upgrades, deletions take place to the underlying hardware, network environment, office infrastructure or key personnel.• Any changes to the BCP need to be notified to the entire BCP team and all the existing hardcopies should be withdrawn and replaced with the updated BCP.• It is mandatory for all vital services to have Recovery plan.• For all BCP components testing should be done at least once every year.• All the functional units shall maintain BCP pertaining to their functions.(x) Policies for IT Support• All the links connecting the centers to the network hub should have a backup circuit• All the links connecting the network hub in each city to other development facilities should have a backup circuit• There should be a backup/redundant firewall available in all locations• For all critical network components like routers, firewalls, modems, MUX’s etc., there should be adequate spares available or there should be service agreements with vendors for rectifying/replacing them within service levels defined in BCP.• Policies for Facilities Department/ HR Department• All the facilities should have adequate fire detection and prevention equipment• All electrical fittings shall be adequately maintained for efficient functioning.• All confidential and sensitive documents shall be access controlled or stored in fireproof cabinets.• All facilities will be guarded round the clock by trained security personnel or by security equipment• There should be well-defined evacuation procedures available in all the facilities• All facilities with multiple floors will have floor Wardens as lead personnel at times of fire, flood or similar exigencies• Since power is a very vital service, it is essential that redundant/backup UPS be available in all the facilities • It is mandatory to have a standby generator in all the facilities• It should have tie ups with travel agencies for making travel arrangements in short notice• In case of a disaster HR should ensure that all the associates are safe. It should also set up a helpdesk to communicate to the associates regarding the disaster(xi) Policies for Finance and Legal Department• It should ensure that all critical company assets are covered by a comprehensive insurance plan• It should have an emergency fund or tie up with banks so that emergency cash could be withdrawn at short notice in case of a disaster. This would be used for any immediate cash requirements that may be required for recovery• Legal requirements if any(xii) Policies for SOC and NOC • All vital systems shall have dedicated stand-by servers. These stand-by servers should be in a different location/center or there should be service agreements with vendors for rectifying/replacing them within service levels.• Ensure project staffing does not suffer due to any disasters by maintaining adequate secondary source of resource who could be allocated at short notice• Develop skilled resources in such a way the skill mix of the organization is aligned with the business directions• All critical software license details and media backups should be stored in alternate sites and in fireproof case.(xiii) Types of IncidentsThe BCP can be invoked in a situation in which normal operations are disrupted by several possible incidents. The incidents can include any Force Majeure or man-made events that will prevent Ericsson’s staff from working at their designated offices during business hours or providing any service at any time of a day.These incidents or events can include but are not limited to:Location(s) Not Available• Fire damage to the office building.• Water damage to the office building.• Bomb/WAR threat or other forms of threat.• No electrical power to the building.• Contamination or toxic pollution in office building.• The office building is a crime scene.• The office access is suspended for security reasons.People Not Available• Widespread illness of staff.• Labor unions/ Strikes not allowing staff to workIT Systems, supportive resources or Tools Not Available• Links between locations not available.• Maintenance or unplanned outage of global IT systems.• Location or Power issue at Power NOCCivil Infrastructure Not Available• No electrical power in the metropolitan area.• Major Transport problem preventing access to premises.Major Telecommunications Infrastructure outage• Major Telecom outage problem preventing access to communication network.• In all these events the technology used to support the customers’ networks may be affected and/or the people supporting the networks may be affected.(xiv) BCP AwarenessIt is mandatory for all the associates to go through the BCP awareness sessions. The BCP awareness sessions should cover the following• SOC & NOC BCP Team• Purpose and criticality of the BCP process• Associate’s role in the BCP process• Evacuation/Emergency proceduresAll the BCP team members in each center should undergo a detailed training on the organizational and functional level BCP process, escalation/communication procedures and job specific training required for them to carry out the recovery process in their respective functions.For all new associates BCP awareness has been made as a separate module as part of the Induction training program. Record of all trainings shall be maintained.(xv) Distribution and Change ManagementThe distribution list will include the BCP Team who is responsible for the business continuity process. There would be two copies applicable for selected personnelApart from the hardcopy, the process will be published through intranet site for enabling access to all our associates. Any changes or updates to the policy should go through the following process-• Any changes to the BCP policy should be approved by the BCP Team• Any changes to the BCP functional level procedures should be approved by the respective functional head• A release note should be published on the changes, and it should be circulated to all concerned members• On completion of changes, the latest copy of the BCP should be distributed to all BCP members after withdrawing the old copies• The latest BCP policy should be published in the Intranet site• eAll BCP documents will follow Version control procedures(xvi) BCP Review and MaintenanceTo ensure that the BCP is current and effective, the BCP policy and procedures should be reviewed and updated once in 6 months. The responsibility for review of organizational BCP Manual shall lie with the BCP Manager and the BCP Team.BCP Compliances and Review ProcessIt is essential that the BCP process be audited regularly to ensure compliance.The Internal audit group would conduct a detailed audit on the following as part of their internal audit cycle. BCP document review/update• BCP testing process• Sufficiency of the policy/procedures• Assessment reports on disasters(xvii) Disaster Recovery StrategyIn disaster scenarios, the recovery strategy has been considered into two Phases namely:• Technical Recovery Phase (Infrastructure components)• Business Recovery Phase (Business components)Technical Recovery PhaseA critical part of handling any serious emergency is in the management of the Technical Recovery phase or recovering the infrastructure components. The priority during this phase is the safety and wellbeing of the employees and other involved persons, the minimization of the emergency itself, the removal or minimization of the threat of further injury or damage and the re-establishment of external services such as power, communications, water etc. A significant task during this phase is also the completion of Damage Assessment of the disaster. In addition to the above, the Technical Recovery Phase may involve different personnel depending upon the type of emergency and a Disaster RecoveryTeam would be nominated according to the requirements of each specific crisis.This phase will also deal with infrastructure components used to support the corporate infrastructure in the existing or alternate site depending upon the disaster impact. It covers such things as:• Network Management• Data Storage• Systems ManagementBusiness Recovery PhaseThe Business Recovery Phase involves the restoration of normal business operations after an unexpected event which has disrupted all or part of the business process. From a business perspective, this is the most critical phase of the whole BCP.The Business Recovery Phase will either directly follow the Technical Recovery Phase or will be directly initiated after a serious emergency incident affecting normal business operations depending upon the disaster impact. At SOC and NOC, the order of restoration of services based on the type of services provided is illustrated in the diagram below. However, there can be some exceptions based on Ooredoo’s specific requirement.Figure 127 - SOC & NOC Service Restoration Order(xviii) Emergency Disaster Scenarios and Recovery ProcedureA Disaster could be caused due to one or more of the following• Unauthorized access• Hardware failure• Utility failure• Natural disasters (Cyclone, Floods, Earthquakes etc.)• Loss of key personnel• Fire• Human errors• Neighborhood hazards• Tampering• Disgruntled employees• Improper use of technology• Repetition of errors• Cascading of errors• Illogical processing• Translation of user needs (technical requirements)• Inability to control technology• Equipment failure• Incorrect entry of data• Erroneous/falsified data• Misuse• HackingDesignated Alternate SitesThe designated alternate sites used during this type of disaster could be one of the following:• Customer/ Ericsson premises at onsite• Customer/ Ericsson designated alternate sitesThe designated site would be identified and covered in customer/ Ericsson specific BCP. The Account manager would be responsible for identifying the designated alternate site.Command Center SitesDesignated primary and alternate command center where the BCP Team or center specific BCP Team members would assemble to conduct an incident briefing in case of major disasters. The incident briefing will be held within 4 hours of the incident to assess the situation and determine whether to activate the Site Recovery Plan (DR) and BCPs.The following are the command centers for each center in India where the team would assemble and chart out action plan for recovery. The others would join the teleconference if possible.CentrePrimary Command CentreAlternate Command Centre 1Ooredoo NOCOoredoo Office, Location to be decided later2Ericsson GSC India, NoidaEricsson GSC India, BangaloreTable 28: Command Centre LocationThe purpose of the incident briefing is to acquire all pertinent information about the situation and determine whether to activate BCPs. The following information should be available:• Status of emergency response activities – Evacuation Status• Description of incident or disaster such as- Disaster type and impact- Location and time of occurrence- Suspected cause and possible potential for extended occurrence- Potential for recurring outage• Injuries and fatalities• Facility or areas affected• Security – Suspected security breaches• Access to the facility• Communication to onsite account managers and other relevant personnel(xix) Business Resumption ProcessOnce the disaster recovery has taken place the business continues in the alternate site. However, it should be noted that the business should resume from the home site since the alternate site is for a short period only. While moving back to the home site, the basic infrastructure should be set-up or recovered first. For returning to home site, the following should be planned to ensure the business operations are not disturbed:Preparation of Facility (Home Site)The damage assessment report will form the base input for determining the following in terms of facility infrastructure:• Office space• Office equipment (telephones, desks, etc.)• Utilities• PeopleRequirements of Network & Systems InfrastructureIt should be also noted that the following identified from the damage assessment report and a feasibility study to assess the components that can be recovered/repaired to avoid procurement.• Network equipment (WAN/LAN)• Servers• Desktops• People• PrintersTime PlanThe above activity (infrastructure components) should be planned; the plan shall include at least the following:• Milestones in each phase with target dates• Man-efforts involved• Estimated cost involved• Detailed plan of action with responsibilities of people(xx) Emergency Handling in case of Remote Connectivity FailureEricsson has proposed dual connectivity for each OpCo so that the remote delivery teams can log in the network for monitoring and trouble shooting.In case the primary / secondary link of any OpCo goes down, remote team will be able to access the network elements of that OpCo through the secondary (VPN over internet)/ primary link and continue supporting the network.In the most unlikely situation of both primary and secondary connectivity links going down leading to remote teams not being able to access the network, support on best efforts will be provided for critical incidents only by the local resources who will directly log in to the NMS/ EMS. Once the primary/ secondary link comes up, the remote delivery team will take over the operations.
List of AcronymsAI Artificial Intelligence3PP3rd party provider5GC5G CoreAPIApplication Programming Interface BERBit Error RateBLERBlock Error RateBoQBill of QuantityCAPEXCapital ExpenditureCEMCustomer Experience ManagementCIC Cell Issue ClassifierCMConfiguration Management DataCSCircuit SwitchCSPCommunication Service ProviderDLDownlinkDOPDesign and Optimization PlatformDTDrive TestE2Eend to endENIQEricsson Network IQENMEricsson Network ManagementEOEEricsson Operations EngineEPCEvolved Packet CoreFDDFrequency Division DuplexFMFault Management DataFWAFixed Wireless Access networkGPSGlobal Positioning SystemHWHardwareIBSIn Building SiteIMSIP and Multimedia SystemIoTInternet of ThingsIRATInter Radio Access TechnologyKPIKey Performance IndicatorLTELong Term EvolutionMBBMobile BroadbandMDTMinimize Drive TestMLMachine LearningNDONetwork Design and OptimizationNMSNetwork Management SystemNOCNetwork Operation CenterNRNew RadioNSANon-StandaloneOGOoredoo GroupOPEXOperational ExpenditureOSSOperations Support SystemPMPerformance Management DataPSPacket SwitchQoE Quality of ExperienceQoS Quality of ServiceR&DResearch and DevelopmentRAN Radio Access NetworkRAN-TSRadio TroubleshootingRCARoot Cause AnalysisRDTRemote Drive TestRETRemote Electrical TiltRF Radio FrequencyROIReturn On InvestmentSAStandaloneSLAService Level AgreementSOService OperationsSONSelf-organizing NetworkSW SoftwareTDDTime Division DuplexTTMTime To MarketUEUser EquipmentUI User InterfaceUIC Uplink Issue ClassifierULUplinkVDTVirtual Drive TestVIPVery Important PersonVM Virtual MachineVoLTEVoice over LTEVoNRVoice over NRWTWalk TestXIC Cell/Uplink Issue ClassifierSCOService Centric OperationNPSNet Promotor Score-----End of Document----                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2023-08-19    Rev  E		© Ericsson AB 20232 (14) Commercial in Confidence